<div id="Fulltext" code="0" wordcount="115668">
fiARY.
Fa. Stats College.
REPORT
OP THE
Committee on the Judiciary, General,
 
OF THE
SENATE OF PENNSYLVANIA,
IN RELATION
0
th ptbmtt foal Jifjfotlfos.
WITH THE
ACCOMPANYING TESTIMON Y.
UARRISBUKG:
B . S I N 0 E R L Y , STATE PRINTER.
1871.
<pb>
<pb>
 
J0T
<pb>
<pb>
REPORT
OF THE
t- ■
Committee on the Judiciary, General,
OF THE
Senate of Pennsylvania,
IN RELATION
C0 % ^n%arite (foal giffimlties,
WITH THE
ACCOMPANYING TESTIMONY.
HARRISBURG:
B. SINOEBLT, STATE PRINTER.
18U.
<pb>
13 3 3 s .2,
 
]
<pb>
PRELIMINARY REPORT.
Mr. Davis, from the Committee on Judiciary, (General,) to which was
referred the subject of coal freights, &c., made a preliminary report, which
was read as follows, viz:
The Committee on the Judiciary, (General,) to whom was referred the
message of the Governor and opinion of the Attorney General on the right
of railroad companies to charge exorbitant rates of freight, having pro-
gressed with the investigation by the examination of many witnesses, and
having as yet reached no final results, but impressed with the grave im-
portance of the whole subject and the difficulty in the way of its adjust-
ment by statutory enactments, and desiring to lead the minds of the pub-
lic and of those directly interested into thoughtful consideration of a set-
tlement of the troubles by the voluntary action of those who are now at
variance, respectfully beg leave to make this preliminary report, expressly
reserving all questions of law and fact for settlement and report at the close
of the investigation, which is to continue until all the evidence shall have
been heard and arguments of counsel made. •
The present difficulties in the anthracite coal region are but an incident
of the great war that for hundreds of years has been waged between labor
and capital. Labor has deemed it hard that the hardest work and hardest
fare generally go together. That those who toil most often earn least; that
in the distribution of fortune's gifts unceasing labor is imposed upon some,
while others are indulged with life long ease and luxury. It seems hard to
delve and plow and sow and reap, while the harvest is gathered into other's
barns. The great practical difficulty is the alleged inadequacy of the share
which, in the partition between labor and capital, of their joint produce,
falls in the shape of wages to the former. The natural dissatisfaction pro-
duced by this real or supposed inequality of partition is sometimes intensi-
fied by the unwise interference of demagogues to promote their own selfish
ends, without one throb of genuine feeling for those whom they seek to
cajole. Such men work only unmixed evil by stimulating and perpetuating
prejudice and hatred, when kindness and conciliation should be the aim of
all.
When working in harmony, capital and labor are mutually beneficial, and
lay each other under reciprocal obligations. If labor be the parent of capi-
tal, capital in turn becomes the foster mother of labor, contributing in large
measure to the combined productiveness. If the profit of capital is the
product of labor, so in turn the wages of labor are the product of capital.
But when labor and capital are in a state of chronic antagonism, these
mutual benefits are entirely lost sight of, and as the motives of both are
hostile, so neither can see in the acts of the other anything but injury, and
during the long and exhaustive war such visions were not always decep-
tive.
205251
<pb>
The only method of settling disputes was the barbarous one of force, each
party seeking to starve the other out. The employer hoped that by stop-
ping the works for some time the men would be finally compelled, by hun-
ger and want, to accept his terms. The men, on the contrary, hoped to
stop work so long that the employer would be compelled to accede to their
demands to avoid great pecuniary loss or total ruin. Bankruptcy threat-
ened the manufacturer and operator, and starvation the workmen. But the
victories gained by either party were only temporary. With renewed ener-
gies the struggle was re-commenced with increased bitterness and the thirst
of vengeance for forced submission.
• During the years of conflict waged on these principles, capital had gradu-
ally developed its capacities, and was extending and consolidating its sway,
and its energies were daily concentrating in fewer hands. Capital is in
itself aggregation, association, combination. But, as in human affairs, ex-
tremes always meet, and action is always met by re-action, so the seemingly
resistless preponderance of associatal capital suggested to labor the remedy
in the form of organized combination. Hence, trades unions and working-
men's benevolent associations. The right of labor to combine is no longer
an open question. If any individual workman be at liberty to refuse work
except on his own terms, any number of workmen must be equally at liberty
collectively to refuse to work except on terms to which, after consulting
together amongst themselves, they may have collectively agreed. Men may
combine to any extent, provided they use none but lawful means, and aim
at none but lawf ul ends.
Thus we have now the two armies of labor and capital complete^ mar-
shalled, fully equipped and ably commanded. Shall there be permanent
peace or war, antagonism or alliance? To quote an eminent economist,
"capital may encroach on labor, labor may in its madness destroy capital,
such is the work of prejudice and evil passions. But however far such a
• strife may be carried, it can only result in mutual injury,'and health can
only be restored by obtaining the recognition of the full rights and obliga-
tions of each. The condition of well-being is peace. A false philosophy
has set the world at war for ages, proclaiming that what one nation gains
another must lose. Akin to it is the belief that hatred and retaliation are
"the normal conditions of capital and labor, that mutual distrust and hurt-
fulness are inevitable in all the developments of industry. Such a belief
blasphemes the harmonies of Providence."
Has not the time then arrived, when prudent and reasonable men of each
and every interest should hush the voice of passion, and refusing to listen
longer to violent counsels, endeavor with all their might to devise means
of escape from the difficulties of the situation and from the dangers which
threaten, not only from within but from without? We believe if this dispo-
sition exists, the experience of other people may indicate a system which
will afford not temporary only but permanent relief. For five hundred
years England, with occasional lulls, has suffered from bloody and ruinous
conflicts between labor and capital. The first great strike on record occurred
among the men employed in building Windsor castle. They left their work
and scattered over the neighboring count'es, but were soon brought back
by force, in obedience to the peremptory mandate of King Edward, aud
savage punishment, in one instance death, was inflicted on the leaders.
And so the vicious system of force and partial legislation went on for
centuries, but failed to bring success to either side, and only in our own
age did it occur to the people and statesmen of that country, that the only
wise thing for the legislature to do was to stand aside and allow the rate
of wages and conditions of labor to be settled by those most interested.
<pb>
In the meantime, millions of money had been wasted, not a little blood
spilled, and ruin and misery threatened every part of the country. At
length, wise men of both parties sought and formed another and a better •
system. Boards of conciliation and arbitration were established, the credit
being due, in a great measure, to Mr. A. J. Mundella, formerly a working-
man himself, and now one of the largest employers in England; and in this
way capital and associated labor were brought into kindly and harmonious
relations to each other. The general need for this was so greatly felt in
that country a few years ago, a royal commission was appointed to examine
into the working of trades unions, and to suggest improvements in the laws
relating to them, and the relations existing between workingmen and em-
ployers. The commission consisted of ten gentlemen of prominence, sat
two years, and received evidence not only from all parts of the united
kingdom, but from all quarters of the world. They concluded their report
by saying, " that the question as to what is a fair rate of wages in the vary-
ing circumstances of trade, from time to time, is one very difficult of ad-
justment between employers and large bodies of workingmen. The strike
is a very hard method of settling such a question, and it is much to be
wished that some plan could be devised, mutually satisfactory to working-
men and employers, in the settling of questions of dispute in such matters.
The establishment of boards of conciliation seems to offer a remedy at
once speedy, safe and simple. These boards require no complex machinery,
no novel division of profits, no new modes of conducting business, no acts
of Parliament; all needed is that representative wo.-kingmen and employ-
ers should meet at stated times and amicably discuss the interests of their
common trade or business. There is not a trade or business in the kingdom
in which this system might not be adopted; and we see no reason why, in
every case, results should not flow from them as satisfactory as those in
Nottingham. Under such a system we should look for a peaceful and pros-
perous condition of labor in this country, and if this commission should
have no other results than calling attention to this simple method of settling
the frequent disputes between workingmen and their employers, we shall
feel that our time will not have been lost in the inquiry."
How these boards of conciliation and arbitration originated, how they
are constituted and how they work, was well described by Mr. Mundella
in an address delivered by him last November in New York, from which
we beg leave to quote as follows:
"Ten years ago, in the town in which I reside, and in the trade with which
I am connected, we had the third strike in one year. This last one had con-
tinued for eleven weeks. Of course the men who were at work subscribed
to the branch 'on strike,' and it was seriously contemplated whether the
proper thing to do would not be to close all the factories in order that those
in employ should not add to the duration of the strike by aiding those out
of employ. A few of us were heartily sick of this state of things, and re-
solved to try if some means could not be devised not only to put an end
to the strike but to prevent its recurrence in the future. We had a fearful
history of conflict to increase our difficulties; we had old hatreds, old feuds
dating from the beginning of the century. The neighborhood was one pro-
verbial for its quarrels between capital and labor. When machinery was
introduced to aid labor, labor rebelled, 'frame-breaking' was the order of
the day, and rose to such a disastrous height that parliament passed a law
making the destruction punishable by death. The death penalty was in-
flicted on six men at one time for 4 frame-breaking' in my town. Strikes
had continued all along until 1859. We called the workingmen together,
©r their representatives rather, and we said to them: 'You are all wasting
<pb>
your funds in fighting against us; when you should be making money you
. are squandering it, and when the time comes that your labor is not in de-
mand your employers will take that opportunity to oppress you.' We agreed
to form a board of arbitration and conciliation, and we discussed the ques-
tion for three days, with a great deal of mutual hostility and a great deal
of strangeness of feeling to find ourselves in the same room with the lead-
ers of the trades unions. However, some of us were resolute and carried
it. We constituted a council to consist equally of employers and employed.
The trades unions were to elect seven members by universal suffrage in their
bodies, and the manufacturers their seven in the same way. These gentle-
men were to meet in some public room—the room of the chamber of com-
merce, indeed it was—and around a common table, and meet not only when
there were disputes but to prevent disputes, periodically, not less than once
a quarter, and discuss questions of labor, all in fact affecting the relations
of employer and employed. We then employed a committee of inquiry,
two of each of our respective parties, who should hear privately any quar-
rel in the initiative state, and if possible crush the thing out there. Well,
you may judge under what feelings we entered the room the first time, seven
employers and seven men regarded as their bitterest enemies. However,
courtesy and kindness begat a reciprocal feeling, and we commenced by
electing a president. I was elected the first president, and we elected a
workingman vice president in order that we might not be outdone in cour-
tesy by the workingmen. I have sat for ten years at the head of that table,
and that same workingman, as vice president, has sat at the other end.
We elected a secretary from each party, and we have kept a record of our
proceedings from that day to this. We have had some very tough arguments
and difficult times to pass through—a great deal of what workingmen in
England call 'jaw.' However, it is a great deal better than those long
struggles and bitter animosities that used to exist between us. We have
never lost one day's labor from that day to this. The change that has come
over the spirit of the neighborhood is remarked throughout England; and,
thank God, the hatchet is so buried that if dug up to-morrow it would be
too rusty and rotten to be used. Well, we continued patiently on our way
with our experiment. Some of the employers of the other towns would not
have anything to do with it. 'What!' they said, 'sit down with the trades
union leaders—never, never.' However, we told them the trades union
leaders had enlightened us on some questions, and on some we had enlight-
ened them. Gradually they fell in .until all the unions and all the employ-
ers are in, and we are all homogenous. If we are in a particularly tight
place—a difficulty which we cannot settle—both parties agree upon an im-
partial umpire, whose decision is final. This has only occurred once with
us, when a reduction of wages was deemed absolutely necessary and just
by the manufacturers, and the unions would only agree to half the reduc-
tion. An umpire was called in, and he split the difference between us. What
happened? One section of one union said: 'We will not stand it, we will
strike.' 'They tried to get the other men to strike. 'What!' they said,
'call in an umpire and not abide his decision 1' and the result was the work-
men kept faith and every man went back to his work. Finding our system
worked so well, other trades followed our example. The first was the lace
trade, and they have had no strike since. Then the Staffordshire potteries
and they report enthusiastically of it. Last of all, after eleven months of
a terrible strike among the iron workers, which reduced the people until they
were without beds or furniture, sleeping on straw, their children bare-foot,
the women having sold the children's shoes to get bread to maintain the
strike, all on the verge of starvation—through the warm, earnest advocacy
<pb>
I
of a good Quaker friend they adopted the same thing. What happened?
They have worked without a day's cessation from then to this time. Once
since they had occasion to call in Judge Eckel as an umpire, and after he
got to them, concluded they could settle their dispute amicably among them-
selves, and did so without his intervention. Again, my friend Mr. Hughes
was called upon to act as umpire in a question of vital interest to the whole
Cleveland district. The second day of the argument before him both par-
ties were reasonable. In half an hour then all was settled; they had agreed
upon the rates of wages for the succeeding year. In the building trades—•
the carpenters and builders—of which Mr. Garth is the head, there are more
than twenty boards of arbitration at work in the different towns of Eng-
land. In some there is a composite board of plumbers, stone masons, car-
penters, etc., who sit down together once a quarter or once a month, and
by talking things over like men and christians, with a kindly feeling to-
wards each other, they arrive at a proper solution of all their difficulties.
And now, gentlemen, I have explained to you what this is, and it is very
simple, and something which can be introduced everywhere. What can be
done in old England, can be done in New England, and what can be done
in either can be clone in the iron and coal districts of Pennsylvania, or any
where else."
The following additional testimony in favor of this system is from a
speech delivered by Mr. Morley, a large manufacturer, at a meeting of the
National association for the promotion of social science in England, held
in 1868, and largely attended by employers and working men.
Mr. Morley said: "I arise to express my conviction of the exceeding
great value of arbitration. It is no mere dilettanteism, it is sound, honest
grappling with a great difficulty. Our firm employs four thousand persons,
and therefore, I am personally and practically interested in the matter. As
the result of an experiment of eight years, we are now working in the
most perfect harmony with our employees. Twenty-five years ago our ma-
chinery was in danger and our trade was subject to constant interruptions
from differences between us and our work people; and. worse than either,
there was a feeling of bitterness between employers and employed of which
we now know nothing. So far from the men feeling any prejudice, or think-
ing that any advantage was taken by them, I venture to say that among
the thousands of working people who have submitted to the decisions of the
board of arbitration in Nottingham, there are not fifty who do not regard
it as existing in their interest and as one of the greatest blessings ever con-
ferred upon them. Nothing in this movement touches eUher the existence
of trades unions or'the right to strike. Having been accustomed, as a
manufacturer, to act with my brother manufacturers, I will say, if you
please to combine with them, I claim for the workmen equal right to do the
same. It is the abuse of trades unions against which I protest. Men have
the right to meet and to sell their labor, as the result of their conference,
for the highest price they can get.
"If it should be objected that boards of arbitration might break up trades
unions, and thus eventually leave the men without organization to protect
themselves in case employers refused to be bound by the decisions of a
board of arbitration, the answer is that without a union. of some kind,
boards of arbitration could not be organized and kept working.' The union
represents the men just as boards of trade, etc., represent operators and
employers.
"It would be difficult to introduce boards of arbitration in any district
where no union of any kind existed among the workingmen. Besides, this
system is advocated by almost every trade union in England.
<pb>
"At the meeting in 1868, already referred to, William Green, chairman
of the Birmingham trades council, said that conciliation alone would not
remedy existing evils. He could not understand so many men meeting and
discussing points at issue, unless they had some mode of finally settling
the matters in dispute, and therefore he took it that arbitration, properly
applied and conducted, was not arbitration enforced by act of Parliament,
with a judge legally appointed, but arbitration in which there was mutual
selection of a gentleman to act as umpire, and that he was very much in
favor of. So far as his experience went, working men, as a class, were
much more ready for arbitration and conciliation than employers were.
"On the same occasion, Mr. Wilkinson, secretary of the United glass
trade society, said: 'One of the leading ideas of arbitration was the cul-
tivation of a conciliatory spirit between the parties concerned. Therefore
he felt convinced that the voluntary plan advocated by Mr. Mundella was
far preferable to the plan that could be legally enforced. Arbitration was
not only important as regarded a settlement of immediate disputes, but it
was also important in that it promoted better feelings between employers
and workmen. It led the master to acknowledge that the workman had a
right to discuss disputes on an equal footing with his employer.'"'
And now, in view of the immense interests in Pennsylvania and else-
where, depending upon the steady and harmonious working of the anthra-
cite coal trade, the committee are of the opinion that a system which has
produced such valuable results in England, should be given an immediate
trial by its application to the entire anthracite coal region.
J. D. DAVIS, Chairman,
ROBERT P. DECHERT,
R. BRUCE PETRIKIN,
HARRY WHITE,
ARTHUR G. OLMSTED.
<pb>
EEPOET.
Mr. Davis, from the Committee on the Judiciary, (General,) to whom
was referred the following resolution, viz:
"Resolved, That the message of the Governor, with the opinion of the
Attorney General as to the power of railroad companies to impose exorbi-
tant freights on anthracite coal, be referred to the General Judiciary Com-
mittee, with power to send for persons and papers, and report to the Sen-
ate by bill or otherwise as speedily as possible," made a report, which was
read as follows, viz:
That the above resolution sprang from the derangement of the labor sys-
tem in the anthracite coal regions, and the consequent action of the railroad
companies in raising their rates of freight. It was founded upon what your
committee think was a total misconception, as well of the power of the
Legislature, as of the true policy to be pursued in such cases, for statutory
enactments could only be based upon a judicial determination of disputed
facts, and a forced adjustment would only aggravate the evil. Under the
plain spirit and purpose of the resolution, the questions submitted were
purely legal ones, and as such they have been treated by us. They are:
First Have the railroad companies by charging their present rates of
freight violated their charters?
Second.—Does the action of those companies in regard to freights,
amount to an abuse of their privileges under their charters'?
On the first question:"
The Reading railroad company are authorized by the twentieth section of
their charter, to adopt such rules and regulations in relation to the transit
of merchandize, &c., as they may deem expedient: Provided, That the toll
on any species of property shall not exceed an average of four cents per
ton per mile. The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, in the case of Boyle vs.
the Philadelphia and Reading railroad company, 4, P. F. S., 318, decided
that the proviso in the above section, restricting tolls to four cents per ton
per mile, referred only to a charge upon others for the use of the road bed,
and that the company were permitted by their charter to charge in addition
for the use of their cars and motive power, such rates as to them might
seem reasonable and proper. Controlled by this decision of the Supreme
Court, the committee report that the Reading railroad are not exceeding
the maximum rates allowed to be charged by their charter.
Besides the Reading road, the investigation embraced the charges made
by the following roads, to wit:
The Lehigh Valley, the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western, the Lacka*
wanna and Bloomsburg, and the Lehigh coal and navigation company's
road. These roads have all, by various supplements to their original char-
ters, been brought under the provisions of the general law of the 13th of
February, 1849, which provides, inter alia, as follows, by the eighteenth
<pb>
"TJpon the completion of any railroad authorized as aforesaid, the same
shall be esteemed a public highway for the conveyance of passengers and
the transportation of freight, subject to such rules and regulations, in rela-
tion to the same, as to the size and construction of wheels, cars and car-
riages, the weight of loads, and all other matters and things connected with
the use of said railroad, as the president and directors may prescribe and
direct: Provided, That the said company shall have the exclusive control
of the motive power, and may, from time to time establish, demand and re-
ceive such rates of toll, or other compensation, for the use of such road and
of said motive power, and for the conveyance of passengers, the transporta-
tion of merchandize and commodities, and the cars or other vehicles con-
veying the same, or otherwise passing over or on the said railroad, as to the
president and directors shall seem reasonable: Provided however neverthe-
less, That said rates of toll and motive power charges, so to be established,
demanded or received, when the cars used for such conveyance or transpor-
tation are owned or furnished by others, shall not exceed two and one-half
cents per mile for each passenger, three cents per mile for each ton of two
thousand pounds of freight, three cents per mile for each passenger or bag-
gage car, and two cents per mile for each burden or freight car, every four
wheels heing computed a car; and in the transportation of passengers, no
charge shall be made to exceed three cents per mile for through passengers,
and three and a half cents per mile for way passengers."
It will be observed that this act allows three cents per mile for each ton
of two thousand pounds to be charged, and, in addition, two cents per mile
for each freight car, every four wheels being computed a car; and this when
the cars are owned or furnished by others. It was testified that each car
"carried at least five tons of two thousand two hundred and forty pounds,
which would make the charge allowed by the act amount to four and six-
teen-hundredth cents per mile per ton.
As it appeared from the evidence that these companies are charging four
cents per mile per ton, they do not appear to be exceeding the maximum
rates allowed by the act of 1849.
The attention of the committee was called to a charge made by the Lacka-
wanna and Bloomsburg road of two dollars for carrying a ton of coal nine
miles. It is alleged, by the company, that the limitation of four and six-
teen-hundredth cents per ton per mile is confined to freight carried in cars
of others, thus leaving them at liberty to charge what they choose when
carrying in their own cars. But your committee are of opinion that this
charge cannot be justified under the terms of the law.
Secondly Have the railroad companies, by charging their present rates
of freight, abused the privileges conferred by their charters?
An inquiry into this question, to be of any practical value, should have
emanated from the law officer of the Commonwealth, through her writ of
quo warranto, and any recommendation from the Legislature to the Execu-
tive on this subject, or any action by us without such inquiry, would have
been beyond our power, and an interference with the duties of the execu-
tive branch of the State government.
It is well settled, by precedent and authority, that in such cases judicial
investigation and determination must precede legislative action. The Su-
preme Court of Pennsylvania, in the case of the Commonwealth vs. the
Pittsburg and Connellsville railroad company, 8 Smith, 46, Judge Shats-
wood, delivering the opinion of the court, declares: "That the Legislature
is not the final judge of the fact of misuse or abuse upon which their poorer
to revoke is conditioned. If this were a contract between man and man it
could not be pretended that when one party reserves the power to resci nd
.
I
<pb>
LI
in a certain event he is thereby constituted the judge of whether the event
has occurred. It is a condition precedent to the exercise of the power, and
the party claiming it must prove affirmatively the existence of the fact.
"What difference does it make that the State is one of the parties? She has
entered into this contract through the Legislature, and in the decision of
all questions of fact which may arise upon it the Judiciary department must
be invoked as in other cases. The power of the Legislature in grants and
contracts is not like the power of the English Parliament. It is limited
and restrained by the provisions of the Federal and State constitutions,
so that it cannot impair contracts either made by itself or others. It cor-
responds more properly to the English Crown, as to which it is certainly
the established law of that country that the King cannot derogate from his
own grant, and when an express power is reserved in a certain event, or
upon certain conditions, it must be proved affirmatively that the event has
occurred or the condition been fulfilled. The current of American authori-
ties sustain this doctrine."
In the Circuit Court of the United States, for the Western circuit of
Pennsylvania, in the case of the Mayor, &c, of Baltimore vs. the Connells-
ville and Southern Pennsylvania railroad company, the court decided "that
if in an act of incorporation the Legislature of a State retains the right to
revoke in case the corporation should misuse and abuse its privileges, the
fact of such misuse, if denied by the corporation, should be established by
competent proceedings, and an act declaring a revocation without the es-
tablishment of such fact is unconstitutional." In the charter of that com-
pany is found the same provision as is contained in the charters of the com-
panies now under consideration, to wit: "If the said company shall at any
time misuse or abuse any of the privileges herein granted, the Legislature
may resume all and singular the rights and privileges hereby granted to
such corporation."
Judge Grier, in delivering the opinion of the court, said: "The State
claims no sovereign power to repudiate its contracts, and the Constitution
delegates no such power to the Legislature. The contract in this case does
not give an unconditional right to the Legislature to repudiate its contract,
nor is the Legislature constituted the tribunal to adjudge the question of
fact as to the misuse or abuse. The Legislature possesses no judicial au-
thority under the Constitution, and has no established course of proceed-
ings in the exercise of such power."
Your committee are therefore of opinion and do so report, that an in-
quiry into the second question above stated is beyond the power of the
Legislature, and if attempted, would be in disregard of well settled legal
principles and only productive of confusion.
The examination of witnesses bearing upon this question was allowed to
take a wide range, partly because it seemed to be the desire of the parties
and partly in the hope that a full development of the facts might suggest
a feasible plan of adjustment, and not because they considered the testi-
mony relevant to the issue, or of any practical value in the settlement of
the legal questions. The views of your committee in regard to an adjust-
ment of the difficulties were presented in their preliminary report, recom-
mending the adoption of the system of boards of arbitration and concilia-
tion, not as a novelty, but because this sj-stem had been thoroughly tried
and found to produce admirable results. And they beg leave again to ad-
vise its adoption without any unnecessary delay, for the reason that war-
fare is unprofitable even with the comparatively harmless weapons of logic
and law books.
One thing more remains to be considered. The distinguished counsel
<pb>
. 12
■who last addressed the committee.said "he did not ask us to recommend a
forfeiture of charters, but he did ask a law which should limit the railroad
companies to a certain amount of charge for transportation." A fair and
comprehensive law of this character, if such an one can be enacted, would
be a consummation devoutly to be wished. If the difficulty of fixing rates
of freight that would be proper and reasonable at all times, in the shifting
fluctuations of trade, could be overcome, such a law would not only apply
to the especial case now in hand, but also to the more widely spread and
permanent cause of complaint in regard to the discrimination made by
railroad companies against local and in favor of through freight. The dis-
satisfaction existing among the people in many parts of Pennsylvania,
arising from this action of the great carrying companies, and the practical
difficulties attending its proper regulation or correction, were laid before
the Senate with much fullness of detail in the report made in 1868 by the
Judiciary Committee, signed by Senators L. D. Shoemaker, chairman, (of
Luzerne,) T. J. Bigham, D. M'Conaughy and George B. Schall, then mem-
bers of the committee, under the following resolutions:
"Resolved, That the Committee on Judiciary (General) be instructed to
inquire into the power of this Legislature to control railroad corporations
of this State by direct legislation on the subject of charges for passengers
and freight, to secure the private citizens of the State from inordinate and
extortionate demands, to assert the sovereignty of the people of the State
over all such corporations within its limits for the general good, and that
said committee have power to send for persons and papers, and to compel
testimony under oath; that said committee is instructed to report to the
Senate at the earliest possible period, by bill or otherwise."—(Resolution
of January 29.)
"Resolved, That the Judiciary Committee of the Senate have full power
and authority to sit during vacation, in Harrisburg or elsewhere, to investi-
gate the subject matters contained in the foregoing resolution, with power
to send for persons and papers, examine witnesses on oath, employ a clerk
or clerks, and take such other action for full investigation thereof, as they
deem proper, and report to the next Legislature, by bill or otherwise, ac-
companied by the testimony taken."—(Resolution of February 18.)
The committee made a lengthy report, embracing a resume of the evi-
dence taken in various parts of the State, to which attention is invited, and
on the general question of limiting charges for transportation they reported
as follows:
"It becomes, then, an important inquiry to ascertain to what extent the
Legislature may interfere to regulate the rates of freight. In this connec-
tion it is proper to remark, that we have not been able to examine and col-
late all the railroad charters granted previous to the general act on that
subject, passed on the 13th day of February, 1849. To consider all these,
with their numerous supplements and amendments, covering a period of
twenty years, would occupy months of close application. So far, however,
as the committee have been able to examine them, they find the directors
clothed with the power of fixing a maximum rate of freight even higher
than is now generally charged, and it is questionable whether this power
can be taken from them without an infringement of their franchises. So
long as they keep within the maximum, it is a question for the courts to
decide whether the public can have redress, provided they do not transcend
their chartered limits in other respects. A charter is a written contract
between the people—through the Legislature—and a number of citizens,
under which, in consideration of certain privileges, the latter invest their
<pb>
money. It is just as obligatory on both parties as' a contract made between
individuals, and the same law prevails for enforcing it."
In addition to the grave constitutional difficulty, we are confronted by
practical impediments most difficult, if not impossible, to overcome. A
rate of freight which was reasonable this year might, from various causes,
be very unreasonable the next. The difference of grade would make a
fixed rate favorable to some roads and very unfair to others, while the in-
tricate problem of the proper arrangement of rates for local and thjough
freight would demand for its solution a period of time utterly beyond the
command of your committee.
Respectfully submitted.
Testimony taken before the General Judiciary Committee of the Senate,
relative to the exorbitant freights on anthracite coal.
Harrisburg, March 8, 1871.
The committee met at 8 o'clock P. M., all the members being present.
The chairman stated that, whilst the matter referred to the committee
seemed to be a mere question of law, it had been decided to hear gentle-
men from the coal regions.
Franklin B. Gowen, president of the Reading railroad company, appeared
and made the following statement:
If I am to confine myself strictly to the nature of your inquiry, it will
take me but a few minutes to say all that I have to say, for it would be
sufficient for this examination into the power of the Reading railroad com-
pany to do what it has done to refer you to the charter of the company,
granted in 1833, where full power was granted to the directors to estab-
lish such rates as they thought, in their judgment, proper, and then to
point to a case in the Supreme Court—Boyle against the Reading railroad
company—in which the court unanimously decided that we had the right
to establish such charges as we pleased. That would be sufficient for a
mere strict legal inquiry as to whether we have exceeded the power granted
in our charter. But I can conceive of a state of facts where a railroad com-
pany may have the legal right to charge such rates as it pleased, and yet
exercise that right in such an arbitrary and unusual manner as to do great
injury to the people of the Commonwealth, and thereby bring upon it the
condemnation of those representing the Commonwealth. So far as the
right to charge is concerned, the authorities I have referred to I think will
be satisfactory.
So far as the second branch is concerned, there are two reasons why, in
my opinion, the present condition of affairs made it eminently proper and
just for us to take the course we did, and made it so absolutely certain that
no injury would be done to anybody, but that our object was to rescue a
great industry, the largest in Pennsylvania, namely, the coal mining in-
terest, from the control of an association that had almost destroyed it, that
I think, when you have heard what I have co say and what the witnesses
have to say, you, gentlemen, will agree with me.
I said there were two reasons. The first of these is this, and it is all
sufficient: The Reading railroad company has some 22,000 cars; it has over
300 locomotives; it has nearly 1,200 miles .of single track railroad; it em-
<pb>
ploys a force of 12,000 men; it is absolutely necessary for it to have this
equipment, to employ this force, and to have these railroads, because, when
the mining operations in the regions which it drains are in full tide of suc-
cessful operation, it is no more than is necessary to carry the product to
market. Hence we are not to blame for incurring this expense, because it
is absolutely necessary, in order to serve the people for whom it is our busi-
ness to transport. That being the case, we have incurred an expense upon
the road so as to make it capable of moving 180,000 tons of coal a week,
and whether we are moving'180,000 tons a week, or only moving 12,000 or
15,000 tons a week, as we have been since the 13th of January, the expenses
of the road are almost identically the same. The difference in the gross
receipts of the road, when it is fully at work and all the mines in operation,
and when the road is doing no coal business, amounts to some $600,000 or
$700,000 a month. The difference in expenses does not amount to $150,000.
Every station agent has to be employed, the whole police of the road, all
those who work at repairing it, every superintendent, everybody connected
with it has to receive the same salary when we are idle as when we are at
work; the only difference being that the hands on the coal trains alone are
idle, and they are a very small proportion of the men employed by the com-
pany. That being the case, whenever a condition of affairs, for which we are
not to blame, a condition of affairs between the coal operators and working-
men occurs, whereby we are deprived of that tonnage, if we did not in-
crease our charges we would go into bankruptcy. It is inevitable. We
have been carrying, from the 13th of January up to about ten days ago, a
tonnage of about 12,000 or 13,000 tons of anthracite per week. If we
charged $10 per ton for that product, we would not be in receipt of so much
money as if we charged seventy-five cents per ton for the product we de-
serve and ought to have; hence, as we are forced to keep up this equipment,
and would be violating our charter by not having adequate means to trans-
port the product of the mines, we are forced to make these high charges
in order that we shall, at the end of the month, have enough money to pay
the men we are obliged to employ. That is one reason.
The other reason involves an examination into the origin of this diffi-
culty. I shall confine myself to the two lower coal fields. I have no per-
sonal knowledge of my own as to the Lehigh region or the Wyoming re-
gion, and I simply refer to the Schuylkill and Mahanoy coal fields, which
depend almost entirely upon the Reading railroad company, and the lines
controlled by the Reading railroad company, for their outlet.
There is, as you know, an association known as the Workingmen's Benevo-
lent association, which really controls almost every man who is engaged in
mining coal. The Reading railroad company has never had the slightest
ill-will or animosity against this organization, except at different times when
it has attempted to overstep its legitimate bounds, and to dictate or control
our own business; then we resisted. We have been so kind to these gen-
tlemen, the workingmen, that we have furnished them, weekly or monthly,
the prices of coal; we have given their agents free tickets 'to travel; in-
deed we gave them free passes to come here now and to try to take our
charters away from us. A few of them have become so elated by the suc-
cess of some of their movements to control the Reading railroad company
and the operators, that they imagine, as they say themselves, that they can
control the Legislature of Pennsylvania.
Let me go back to 1869. This organization first came into full fledged
existence, in all the regions, in 1869. They then formed this Workingmen's
Benevolent association, extending throughout the entire coal fields of
Pennsylvania. Their object—and it was a fair and legitimate object,
<pb>
and there was no objection to it by any in our region except that they
asked too much—their object was to have a scale of wages that should
regulate itself according to the price of coal. When coal sold at a high
price they should have high wages, and when it fell their wages should fall
with it. In order to accomplish this object in 1869 they issued an order,
from which there is no appeal. The man who appeals from that order
must go down into the tomb. You know the state of society in these coal
regions. They issued a decree that there should be a general strike in
1869; it was obeyed in all the regions. As soon as this strike was fairly
inaugurated the operators in Schuylkill county agreed with their men that
would pay them upon a basis, i. e., pay a certain rate of wages when coal
sold at three dollars per ton at Port Carbon, and that it should rise as coal
rose, and never fall below three dollars. They cduld then very well afford
to pay those wages, because the Lehigh and Wyoming regions were idle;
there was no one to supply the market except the Schuylkill region, and
coal went up to three or four dollars at the mines. They went on for three
or four months, and at last the other regions, seeing that they were losing
the market, agreed to some arrangement with the men. . In Wyoming and
Lehigh they went to work. They had not been at work more than six
weeks altogether before it was feund that the market was so full that the
price fell below three dollars. The season closed, and the question was,
what basis should be paid for the next year. The operators, finding that
when all the regions were at work coal sold at less than three dollars, pre-
sented a new basis, by which coal could go to two dollars and fifty cents.
The men in Schuylkill county would not accept it. They struck in March,
1870, and on the first of April, 1870, they stopped work entirely in Schuyl-
kill county. Schuylkill county then being out, and the other two regions
at work, the latter could afford to pay higher wages, because the product
of Schuylkill county being thrown out of the market, the price of coal rose
so high that it was the policy of the other regions to pay high wages, so
as to keep Schuylkill out. This lasted until August, 1870. Then, at the
request of Mr. Siney, I appeared at a meeting of the workingmen in Schuyl-
kill county, to endeavor, if possible, to compromise the difficulty. The
men had been out four months and a half; many of them were poor; they
behaved very well on that occasion. They agreed when coal sold at two
dollars they would take thirty-three (33) per cent. less than when it was
three dollars. That was satisfactory to the railroad company; we thought
it was right. We pledged them that we would reduce our rates. The
company reduced their rates, and the operators accepted it and went to
work on the 1st of August, 1870, at this rate of wages I had negotiated
with the men, which was known. as the Gowen compromise. The men
worked the whole of the remainder of that season, and coal went down to
two dollars and twenty-five cents in November, because all the regions
were at work. Just here I want to say that it is not fair to the community
that coal should ever be higher than two dollars and fifty cents—that coal
can be produced at two dollars and fifty cents, leaving a profit to all con-
cerned, if the operator can work ten months in the year, and not have a
strike every few months. It can be produced at a profit, and give to every
good miner from four to five dollars per day, if he will work eight hours a
day. I can bring one hundred pay-rolls here at the next meeting to de-
monstrate that fact to you. The community is interested in this. For
every workman in Schuylkill county interested in keeping the price of coal
up to three dollars, there are one hundred poor women and children in the
great manufacturing centres of our country that are interested in keeping
it down. In the month of November, last year, the workingmen met the
<pb>
operators in our region, in order to settle the rates of wages for the present
year, and they then agreed upon a rate of wages for the whole of the year
1871, which was entirely satisfactory to both parties. I have the original
agreement, which I will read:
"To commence with coal at $2 50 at Port Carbon.
"Outside wages to be $9 per week.
"Inside wages to be $10 per week.
"Miners, (day's work,) $12 per week.
"Contract work to be reduced 16| per cent. from the present basis, and
the reduction or addition of percentage to be graded in the new price thus
formed.
"The advance or decline to be graded on the $2 50 basis, at the rate of
one per cent. for three cents raise or fall in the price of coal.
"The committee on the part of the Anthracite Board of Trade and the
Workingmen Benevolent association respectively recommend the adoption
of the above, providing that a satisfactory arrangement be made with the
Philadelphia and Reading railroad company for the fair reduction of tolls.
After this was agreed upon, a sub-committee of both these organizations
was appointed to call upon me in Philadelphia. Mr. Siney and Mr. Ryan
on behalf of the workingmen, and Mr. Kendrick and Mr. Cole—and per-
haps another, but certainly those two—on behalf of the operators, called
at my office and laid that paper before me as the adjustment of the wages
for 1871. I congratulated them upon it, and told them it was perfectly
fair, and I thought we would have no further trouble. They then asked
what reduction of t611s we would make. I told them if they worked at these
rates we would reduce our tolls very considerably, and I intimated to
one or two of them what it would be, but told them that the directors had
to fix the rates. I suggested what they would be and they left perfectly
satisfied. This was in November; they kept on until December. In the
early part of December a difficulty arose in another region. The three
companies in Luzerne, who had been paying very high wages to keep the
men from going into this benevolent association upon a basis, reduced their
wages, and the men in the upper regions struck. It was no fault of our
region at all. Immediately after that, I found that the men in our region
were listening to inducements to join in that strike, and I received a letter
from Mr. Siney, some time in December, announcing to me that the Grand
Council had ordered a strike to take effect on the 10th of January. This,
to me, was such a violation of everything that had been agreed upon before,
it was so outrageous to make our county suffer for the wrongs of others,
that I wrote a long letter to Mr. Siney, dated January 30, which I have
here and would like to read, because the New York papers have stated
that the Reading railroad company has entered into a combination to raise
the prices of coal. That letter reads as follows:
"proposition for adjusting wages for 1871.
"A. B. of T.
"TF. B. A.
 
JAMES RYAN,
EDWARD KETING,
PETER MURRY."
JOHN F. M'VEIGH,
JOHN P. FRANCIS,
JOHN SINEY,
J
<pb>
[copy.]
Philadelphia and Reading Railroad Co.,
Office 227 South Fourth Street,
Philadelphia, December 30,1870.
John Siney, Esq., St. Clair, Penn'a:
Dear Sir :—I have your letter of December 23. I regret the strike very
much, and though it will doubtless help the men of the three companies,
I feel that it will be a great injury to the workingmen of Schuylkill county.
It appears to me that the workingmen of Schuylkill are being used en- .
tirely in the interests of the men of the other regions; that whenever there
is to be a strike in one region only, it must be in Schuylkill county, but when-
ever the Wyoming and Lackawanna regions suspend Schuylkill county
must stop also. When the Schuylkill men had the long strike of last year
the workingmen of all the other regions profited by it and kept at work at
large wages, which their employers were enabled to pay in consequence of
the suspension in Schuylkill, but now, when the other region suspends, in-
stead of the men of Schuylkill obtaining any benefit from the large winter
business that might be done, they are forced to stop also, so as to help
those who injured them.
You must be aware that there is a great deal of destitution among the
workingmen in consequence of the small amount of work done last year,
and that the winter business would have been of great importance to them;
but, by the action of the council, they are forced to go through a hard
winter without any money left from the last season and without any pros-
pect of wages during the cold weather.
It seems to me that the practical results of the strike will be these:
1. Coal will open brisk and high in the spring, and continue so for three
or four weeks, after which it will fall in price and the trade become dull,
which will have a very dispiriting effect upon the men. It is better for all
the interests that coal should open at low rates, and the market continue
steady, than that the price should be high in March and April and fall
afterwards.
2. The fact of coal opening at high rates in the early spring when most
of the large contracts for manufactures are taken, will induce many to use
bituminous coal on account of its price and certainty of supply, who would
otherwise have preferred anthracite.
3. As soon as the trade is fairly open the men of the three companies
will go to work, upon some compromise with their employers and without
a basis, and having used the workmen of Schuylkill county to accomplish
their purpose, as they did last year, will be the only gainers by the strike.
4. The uncertainty of supply and the probable high price of coal in
March and April, taken in connection with the dullness of the pig iron
trade, will induce some furnaces to blow out, and prevent others from
blowing in, and seriously diminish the demand from iron manufactures.
I know of one case directly in point, where a large furnace on the Susque-
hanna, about to blow in and to use Mahanoy lump coal, will now remain out
of blast until its proprietors can be assured that they will receive a supply
of coal with regularity.
I am very firmly convinced that the results of a strike are always disad-
vantageous to the workingmen, more especially when the strike is intended
to raise the price of coal by diminishing its production. It is true that to
lessen production may temporarily increase prices, but when you consider
that high prices tend to curtail consumption, you will find that the real and
 
*
2
<pb>
lasting effect of a strike is to prevent natural and legitimate causes from ope-
rating in favor of the trade. A continued repetition of last year's expe-
rience would, in three years, break up every coal operator and destroy the
trade, while steady work, at moderate rates, would, in less time, produce
such an increased demand for coal as would furnish to all the regions
plenty of employment at much better wages than can ever be secured by
a strike.
The real interests of the men are to be served by increasing the demand
for coal, but the present design seems to be to diminish its production. To
increase the consumption is to secure a lasting benefit, by the natural and
. legitimate operation of those laws which govern trade throughout the
world. To lessen the production of an article of principal necessity is to
obtain a present temporary benefit, (by means which are not only unwise,
but actually criminal,) at the expense of the whole future of the trade.
Very respectfully,
(Signed) FRANKLIN B. GOWEN, President.
Mr. Siney wrote me a letter shortly after that, and I replied as follows:
[COPT.]
Philadelphia and Reading Railroad Co., )
Office 227 South Fourth Street, V
Philadelphia, December 31, 1870. )
John Sinet, Esq., St. Clair:
Dear Sir :—I have yours of December 29, and enclose you pass for the
year. 1871. What I said about the Luzerne companies to Mr. Kendrick
and to others was pretty nearly what I suggested to you in the letter I
wrote you yesterday, that I was forced to the cenclusion that the W. B. A.
was managed in the interests of the men of the Luzerne companies and
not in the interest of those of Schuylkill county. I, perhaps, may be wrong
in this surmise, but I do not see how any disinterested person can come to
any other conclusion when it is seen that the men of Schuylkill county
must bear all the losses, and lay idle to help the men of the Luzerne re-
gion, while the latter go to work whenever they please, basis or no basis,
and without any regard to the real interests of those of Schuylkill county.
It seems to me to be very unjust to have delegates from Luzerne county
voting to keep the men of Schuylkill idle, when no cause for the stoppage
exists in Schuylkill county.
The collieries of the Wyoming region are, I suppose, pretty well pre-
pared for next year's business. It is important that many of the collieries
of Schnylkill county should do a great deal of dead work this winter, which
can only be done economically when the breakers can be worked a little to
get rid of the coal from the gangways, schutes, headings, &c. Now this
being the case, and well known to be the case, what other inference can be
drawn, than that the W. B. A. is being managed in the interests of the up-
per regions, when it is seen that the representatives of those upper regions
control the council and compel the Schuylkill miners to stop against their
will, when there is a market that would take the coal, and when there is no
difficulty between the workmen of Sehuylkill county and the coal operators
upon the question of wages.
Very respectfully,
(Signed) FRANKLIN B. GOWEN, President.
<pb>
I received no reply to that, and two weeks afterwards, on the 10th of
January, the strike commenced. The order for the suspension was an im-
perative one; every body must stop work. It made no difference if the
men in one colliery were anxious to work; if they disobeyed the order they
knew what their doom would be. It made no difference if a man knew that
he must go home to find his wife and children starving for want of bread.
That order was obe37ed as literally as ever any order of the Khan of Tar-
tary was obeyed. There never was any cause for suspension. The miners
could have earned three or four dollars a day through the winter, and when
the spring opened could have earned four or five dollars. But the order
was obeyed; the Reading railroad company was thrown out of business;
20,000 or 30,000 of these poor men were thrown idle by the order of three
or four men who met and determined that they should do no work. Every
industry in Pennsylvania which we have to boast of, all this immense capi-
tal, gathered to develop these industries, to build railroads and to put up
furnaces, by the decree of a few leaders who pretend to control it, was all
made as nothing. Why? Because in one region they attempted to reduce
the wages. There was no attempt to make a reduction in Schuylkill county;
there was no design to reduce. The thought had never entered into the
heads of the operators in Schuylkill county to destroy this organization or
to fight it*. But, seduced by the manner in which they had been met by
'some few politicians, they thought that they owned and bad control of all
this industry, and, without sense, without right, without calculating the
consequences, they stopped, in an instant, everything. What were we to
do? We had been prepared for this enormous trade; the market would
have taken it; we were ready to carry it. No matter what may be said to
you, the workingmen of Schuylkill county understood this question, and
if they had been permitted to vote by secret ballot almost every man would
have been anxious to keep at work. I have lived in that county for ten
years and know a great deal about it. I know the tremendous effect such
an association as this has, which issues orders which no one dare disobey.
There never, since the middle ages, existed a tyranny like this on the face
of God's earth. There has never been, in the most despotic government in
the world, such a tyranny, before which the poor laboring man has to crouch
like a whipped spaniel before the lash, and dare not say that his soul is his
own. Can it be for a moment supposed that we, in whose hands are mil-
lions of dollars, invested by women and children, who depend for bread
upon it, shall stand idly by without making some little effort to save it?
Such a thing has never been heard of before under Heaven. I do not charge
this Workingmen's Benevolent association with it, but I say there is an
association which votes in secret, at night, that men's lives shall be taken,
and that they shall be shot before their wives, murdered in cold blood, for
daring to work against the order. At Trevorton, six or eight weeks ago,
a man, working outside of this organization and against their order, who
was sitting quietly beside a sick neighbor, was shot and killed by a bullet
through the window of the house. Last week there was an attempt to kill
a man working outside of this organization, by igniting a keg of powder
under his house, and he was then shot. I do not blame this association, but
I blame another association for doing it; and it happens that the only men
who are shot are the men who dare to disobey the mandates of the Work-
ingmen's Benevolent association. Is this to last forever? Can there Ue
no redress? Can it be that in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which
has this vast body of coal, this great industry, which has supported the
State of Pennsylvania, which has paid its taxes, is to be singled out and
made subservient entirely to the dictates of the workingmen? If it is,
<pb>
then, gentlemen, good-bye to the credit of Pennsylvania, good-bye to the
coal mining and manufacturing industries. Let every man give it up and
go home and be a poor man, because this, that we all relied upon as being
the wealth of the State, is rendered valueless. Out of this industry the
Reading railroad company has paid, in eight years, $2,250,000, in cash, as
taxes to the State for its prosecution. If we have no work we can pay no
taxes.
Now, then, let me speak to you about the price of coal. What do these
men claim? They claim this—that coal shall never sell for less than $8
per ton at Port Carbon. If the operators knew that price could be main-
tained they could afford to pay them the wages they ask. But that price
is from fifty to seventy five-cents a ton higher than coal ought to sell for;
it is that much higher than the community ought to pay for it. It can
sell for $2 25 and $2 50, and produce just as good wages, and better, than
any other class of labor receives in the United States. What is the effect
of high prices upon furnaces? The iron trade has been prostrated. If
every manufacturer of iron is to pay $3 per ton for coal at Port Carbon,
and $3 50 at Mauch Chunk, the iron industry is destroyed forever, because
at this time there is a struggle between Pennsylvania and the new openings
in the South as to which shall be the place for the future manufacture of
iron in this country. It is not only the price, but the uncertainty of sup-
ply that is an evil. In 1869 we had a six weeks' strike in the middle of
the season. In 1870 we had twenty weeks of idleness. Every manufac-
turing establishment has to guard against these strikes, and pile up in its
yard an enormous amount of coal, which requires a great deal of capital.
It has been customary to get a supply daily, but when these strikes are
threatened they have to lay up enough to last them three or four months,
and a large amount of capital is thereby required. The workingmen de-
mand the $3 basis as the minimum. They said they would not work for
anything less than that. This was in February. The operators, with
great unanimity, refused to accept that. Were they right? They were,
because if all the regions had been at work coal would not have sold for
more than $2 50. When coal sells for $3, and they pay the $3 basis, there
is a profit of forty cents per ton, provided there is no stoppages; but a
stoppage of one month is twenty-five cents off of the profit of every ton
they send for ten thousand tons. When coal goes down to $2 50, when
$3 is the minimum basis of wages, there is no profit on it, but a loss. Why,
then, is it that this particular industry shall be singled out, and the com-
munity told "you must pay that much for your coal, notwithstanding there
are people here who would mine it for much less and sell it for much less.?"
Why should this be done? Has it ever been said in the iron trade that
pig iron shall not be sold for less than $30 per ton? English iron would
come in and sweep the manufacturers out of existence. There is no other
region but Pennsylvania where anthracite coal can be got. True, there is
bituminous coal, and these repeated strikes have lead Congress to think
very seriously about taking the duty off bituminous coal. If one dollar is
taken off bituminous coal, that coal can be introduced into the sea ports of
the United States—into Boston, Portsmouth, Baltimore and New York—
at a rate so much below anthracite that it would be to the interest of the
consumer to buy that coal instead of anthracite, and to that extent it is a
blow against the anthracite region of Pennsylvania.
Hence it was that when these operators in Schuylkill county refused to
give these wages, the Reading railroad company saw there would be no
business for them to do. We have got to keep up our expenditures of
$500,000 or $600,000 a month, and the only business we have is the pas-
<pb>
2L
senger and merchandize business. If we had not raised our rates we
would have lost $100,000 or $200,000 a month more than we are now losing.
We are not to blame. If they create a fictitious price for an article of
prime necessity, so that it prevents any body working, we are not to blame.
When the committee came before me in November last, I told them that if
there were no strikes, the price of freights, when the trade opened on the
first of March, would be very low, and they appeared satisfied. I made
it an express condition that there should be no more strikes. Mr. Siney
said, " what would you think of stopping three or four weeks in July?" I
told him that I did not think strikes were the way to handle any question
at all; it was an arbitrary way. They left me, understanding that this
matter was settled, and yet you see how the matter has been treated.
By Mr. Olmsted—Q. Who did these parties signing this agreement pur-
port to represent?
A. The Benevolent association of Schuylkill; it was a committee of the
Workingmen's Benevolent association of Schuylkill county, which met a
committee of the Anthracite Board Trade, to fix the rate of wages for 1871.
Q. There is a separate organization, one in Schuylkill and one above'!
A. It is all one main organization, but there are branches of it; they
have a main president over all; then they have local sub-divisions, one of
which is in Schuylkill county; I think John Siney is president of the
Schuylkill county branch; they have sub-committees for different districts.
By Mr. White.—Q. Do I understand you that they have an association in
the Wyoming region, and the Lehigh and Schuylkill regions?
A. Yes, sir; and it is all centred in a Congress called the Grand Council,
which governs every thing. The delegates from Schuylkill and Wyoming
united together can vote Lehigh out, and Lehigh and Wyoming can vote
Schuylkill out, and Schuylkill county has stopped when the other regions
were at work. It places the whole industry of the community, and the
property and the lives of the citizens of this State, in the hands of an or-
ganization that has not one dollar of capital invested in the business. It
is a claim that has never before been made in the history of the world. I
know that in England they have co-operative societies, where each man
pays in his own share of the capital, and they work with their own hands
and share the profits, but then they share the losses. Here, however, they
put in not one doller, you must furnish all the capital and bear all the losses,
and when you make money the say " you must give us half of it or three-
fourths." Such a demand has never been made in the history of any trade
in the world.
Q. How many tons did the Reading railroad carry last year?
A. Four millions six hundred thousand tons; it should have moved six
millions.
Q. What were the average rates?
A. They average $140 on every ton we moved; we carried coal to the
retailers in Philadelphia in small quantities from Schuylkill Haven at $1 92;
after the first of August we got $2 00; the coal we carry to the great de-
pot at Richmond in large train loads we.carry sometimes for considerably
less. The lowest we got for that was $1 20, and the highest $1 80,lastyear,
but the average that we received last year was $1 40; multiply the whole
tonnage by $1 40, and it will show you the exact sum of money we received
for carrying coal. The entire profit we made on that last year was thirty-
one cents per ton, after paying the interest. We did not make so much
money on the coal trade last year as we would if we had simply rented our
cars to Judge Parker, discharged our hands and carried no coal, all on ac-
count of this strike. Js"o matter how prosperous the coal trade may be, it
<pb>
is certain there will he 2,000,000 of tons less burned this year than there
would have been if it had not been for the strikes in the last two years.
Had it not been for the strikes of 1869 and 1870, and the fictitious prices of
coal, and the consequent introduction of other fuels, there would have been
2,000,000 of tons more of anthracite coal burned this year than there will
be now.
Now, in regard to the Workingmen's Benevolent association, although
we never had any fights with them, I have always endeavored to impress
upon Mr. Siney the fact that the way to benefit his association was to in-
crease the consumption of coal; his idea is to make it scarce in the market.
That is not the way. One month of stoppage induces the people to burn
bituminous coal and other fuels.
Again, you notice that the anthracite coal fields are a small part of Penn-
sylvania, and the increase in the consumption of coal is as the circle is ex-
panded, of which the coal field is the centre. The lower in price coal is,
at the end of the radius, the quicker it is introduced in place of other fuels.
If coal is eight dollars and wood four dollars, people will burn the wood;
if anthracite coal is five dollars per ton and bituminous four dollars, people
will burn the anthracite. I have endeavored to induce these men to un-
derstand that if they will work steadily all the year round, at moderate
rates, they will make actually more money. That would reduce the cost
of coal 25 cents in labor alone. If the operator could work all the year
round he could sell coal 25 cents less. If the Reading railroad company
had business all the year round they could carry it for 25 cents less, making
together an amount of 75 cents. That difference in price would extend the
use of anthracite coal fifty (50) miles further from the centre, and make a
certain market for any over production of coal. That is the way to solve
this question. The workmen have an idea that any body who talks to them
upon the part of an operator or a railroad man is an enemy. But they
listen to the New York papers; they listen to these free trade papers, not
knowing that these papers are endeavoring to keep up this fight, to the in-
jury of the workingmen, so as to make use of it as an argument in favor
of repealing the duty on bituminous coal. Any man can see that a lasting
benefit to the workingmen is to be gained by increasing the demand for
coal. I know an instance in the Schuylkill valley where one of the largest
manufacturing establishments that used to burn anthracite commenced to
burn bituminous coal during one of these srtikes, and has been burning it
ever since, paying $1 50 more per ton than for anthracite. The Reading
company, during the strike of last year, was forced to roll its rails with bi-
tuminous coal, brought from the bituminous regions. There are many in-
stances in New York, where the largest steamboat lines never burned any
thing else but anthracite, thus throwing into this Commonwealth a large
amount of revenue, have changed their furnaces and now burn bituminous
coal from the Cumberland region. That is the effect of these strikes. The
operators say to the men "we will give you exactly what your representa-
tives agreed to take." I have been told since the negotiations have been
going on that the workingmen have agreed to slide down to $2 50, but not
lower. Mr. Siney told me at my house, within the last three weeks, that
our offer was fair and right, and he said to me "if the workingmen do not
accept it I will resign my position in the society and go back to work."
He went up to Pottsville, and in a day or two he came out in a fierce let-
ter against the Reading railroad company. It is an avowed struggle, on
the part of the workingmen, for the purpose of increasing the price of coal
when there was no dispute about wages. I am very free to say that I be-
lieve that if it had not bee.n for the encouragement which these workingmen
<pb>
had received at Harrisburg they would all have been at work ten days ago.
I believe that the political agitation of this question has taken an average
of fifty dollars a month from 40,000 workingmen in Pennsylvania, from the
large numbers of furnaces, railroads and canals that are idle on account of
this strike.
By Mr. Olmsted Q. You refer to a case where the Supreme Court have
adjudicated—can you give me the reference?
A. No, sir; it was the case of Boyle vs. the Reading railroad company.
By Mr. White Q. How long has this strike continued?
A. From the 10th of January in our region; in the Wyoming region it
commenced on the 1st of December, among the men of the three upper com-
panies.
Q. What are your rates now?
A. Six dollars a ton to Philadelphia.
Q. How long have they been that?
A. Since last Monday; prior to that they were four dollars a ton, for
two weeks, perhaps. The average tonnage up to the last three weeks has
not been 12,000 tons a week; our capacity now is at least 180,000 tons a
week, and we have to incur and pay the expense necessarily to transport
that.
By Mr. Olmsted.—Q. How is this going to end?
A. It can end whenever the workingmen listen to reason, and sit quietly
down among themselves and meet the operators and let some umpire de-
cide it. I have been trying to do that; I have cited cases in England where
it has done great good; let the workingmen have their committee and the
operators their committee, and if they cannot agree let some umpire decide
between them.
By Mr. White—Q. An official commission?
A. Yes, sir; that is what I mean.
Q. Can you furnish an estimate of the amount of tons carried for the
last month?
A. Yes, sir; I can furnish the amount of tonnage for the last eleven
weeks.
Coal tonnage over P. and R. R. R.,for week ending January 14, 1871:
Tons. cwt.
Antljjjjcite 37,399 09
Bituminous :5,025 18
Company's use 1, 689 03
For week ending January 21, 1871:
44. 114
10
18
5,8*6
19
830
08
For week ending January 28, 1871:
19, 627
05
00
00
, 487
06
#* ..
11,496
06
<pb>
For week ending February 4, 1871:
Tons. owt.
Anthracite 8,781 19
Bituminous.. 6,411 15
Company's use 1,548 04
16,741 18
For week ending February 11, 1871:
Anthracite 13,114 17
Bituminous 6,378 14
Company's use 1,267 18
20,761 09
For week ending February 18, 1871:
Anthracite 15,153 05
Bituminous 7, 185 05
Company's use 1,452 15
23,791 05
For week ending February 25, 1871:
Anthracite 27,424 05
Bituminous 7,723 02
Company's use 2,025 05
37,172 12
For week ending March 4, 1871:
Anthracite 40,930 11
Bituminous 8,232 09
Company's use 2,809 19
51,972 19
DAILY TONNAGE.
For Monday, March 6:
Anthracite 2,486 05
Bituminous 2,552 16
Company's use 487 05
5,526 06
For Tuesday, March 7:
Anthracite 2,400 06
Bituminous 1,302 16
Company's use 312 05
4,015 07
<pb>
For Wednesday, March 8:
Tons. cwt.
Anthracite
Bituminous ...
Company's use
3,477 11
1,952 14
459 00
5,889 05
The offer that has been made to the men is the offer that has been sug-
gested by the railroad companies and by the men themselves, and is higher
than the offer that the operators made.
By Mr. Olmsted Q. Are there not a great many operators willing to
resume work at the old rates?
A. I do not know that there are any that would commence that were not
working last week; of course there are men who will take the opportunity
of making money; there are always a few who are anxious to get up a strug-
gle, and say to the men, "I will pay your wages," because they get enor-
mous prices. The product of anthracite coal, I suppose, is over 500,000
tons a week; that is the capacity of production; there is capacity to trans-
port no more than 480,000 tons. I do not think any of the companies have
greatly increased their rolling stock the last year. The product of coal
being 480,000 tons a week, and the market being sufficient to take that
amount, it follows that if eight or ten operators can keep up their collieries
when the rest are idle they could get a fabulous price, and hence they could
say to to the men, "we will give you any price you ask." The working
men think that these men are their friends. Take the number of operators
in our region who rejected this $3 basis, and outside of them I think the
utmost the others could give us would be 30,000 tons a week. If we get
180,000 tons a week, at an average of $1 50 a ton, it is about what we ought
to have. But if we carry 20,000 tons a week, and get $6 for the whole of
it, it is only $500,000, instead of a million. As we are obliged to keep up
this equipment, and would be derelict to the State if we did not, we of course
are obliged to incur this expense.
By Mr. White Q. There is a conflict between the operators and men?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Is there a conflict between the operators and the Reading railroad
company?
A. An entire accord; it is from the operators that we derive our revenue;
they are our customers, and it is our duty to protect them.
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. Is there organization among the operators to keep
up prices?
A. Not at present; they did not even have a combination in our region
about prices, because there are too many of them. There are 171 collieries
in our region, and there is no board that regulates the price. In the Le-
high region tuey have a board that meets once a month and fixes the price
of coal; in our region it is a scrimmage; everybody sells at what they can
get.
By Mr. Olmsted—Q. There is a very general impression, I find, in the
newspapers, that sometimes the operators work in concert with this associa-
tion for the purpose of getting up strikes?
A. I do not believe anything of the kind ever occurred. I believe the
workingmen were led into this by a few operators. I know that in our re-
gion there are a few men who think the coal trade should be a speculation;
I believe they told the workingmen that the best way to cure this evil was
to get up this strike. I want to say that, in justice to the Workingmen's
<pb>
Benevolent association, I know there are a few operators in Schuylkill
county who think that the way to make money is to rush up the price and
have six months of good business, and then sell out their collieries on the
strength of it. I believe the first devilment put into the heads of the men
came from them.
By a member of the W. B. A Q. You charged us with being a secret
society of murderers?
A. I said nothing of the kind; I said I did not want to charge the Work-
ingmen's Benevolent association with it, but that there was another society
which did these deeds, and whenever a man was shot it was a man working
outside of this association.
[A member of the W. B. A. at this point, said he declared, on his solemn
oath, that he had never taken a secret oath in an association of any kind;
the association was composed of five nationalities; it was contrary to the
religious creed of the Irish portion of the community to enter a secret
society.]
By a member of the W. B. A Q. What is the capacity of the Reading
railroad company and canal.
A. About 180,000 tons a week.
Q. [By a member of the W. B. A.] That is more than one-third of what
the market will consume; the coal market consumes no more than sixteen
millions; I do not think it consumed that last year.
Mr. Gowen—When I t<aid 180,000 tons a week, I meant that is the entire
product we move; some of that, after being moved upon our road, goes
to the Northern Central road, and some of it, before it gets to us, comes
over Judge Packer's road; of the amount we carry, probably there is
15,000 or 16,000 tons a week that would go to market by some other road;
we carry coal that comes from the Lehigh region, and we send a good deal
down to the Northern Central road.
Hon. Asa Packer, president of the Lehigh Valley railroad company, ap-
peared and made the following statement:
I have very little to say in addition to what Mr. Gowen has said. What he
has said in relation to the Schuylkill region applies to the Lehigh region;
we have there what is called the five dollar basis. The basis at each of the
points, I believe, is made as nearly equitable as the parties themselves can
agree upon. Our region felt that the basis was too high—one that they
could not live by and keep constantly at work; if they had to work their
rate must be higher for the time they do work, because the expenses go
on. For that reason they felt that it was necessary to produce coal at as
cheap a price as they could, and get the largest quantity. Our road has
not carried as much as the Reading, but we carried last year 3,600,000
tons, and we have an equipment by which we could carry one-fourth more
than that. We have interruptions, and consequently must have a larger
equipment than would be necessary if we were regularly employed. We
are subject, as Mr. Gowen has stated, to nearly the same expense when
lying idle as we are when at work, and we felt that we were entitled, if we
had all the work to do in three-fourths of the time, to that much more for
it, unless there was an absolute necessity for the stoppage; if there was,
we were willing to share with the others all the way through. But when
we were competed to stop transporting merely for the purpose of putting
up the price of coal, a matter which was wrong in principle, and against
the interests of the miner and operator, and worse to the public, we felt
justified, as I think the laborer would, if he only worked three houra in the
day, that he must have more than if he worked the full time. There was
<pb>
no question in our region, no difficulty between the operators and miners,
until the miners took the stand that they must strike for the purpose of
putting up the price of coal. Before the time they fixed upon, one-half of
the furnaces in the Lehigh region had stopped; the others kept going as
• long as they could, and their business has been suspended. They did not
feel, on account of the insecurity of the price of coal, that they could manu-
facture iron and keep on if ther; could not be more regularity. There are
over twenty iron furnaces closed up in Lehigh; there are thirty-eight of
them altogether in the valley; there are several of those not out, which
are stopped; they are holding on with the hope that they will be able to
resume before they go entirely out.
By Mr. Olmsted.—Q. Are you carrying any coal on you road now, at
your present rates?
A. 1 think our tonnage, week before last, was about 8,00© tons; last week
it was 10,000 tons; I can get the figures. Before there was any change
made, our tonnage was less than 1,000 tons a week; we have about 4,000
men employed.
Q. What are your rates now?
A. Our rates now, I think, are four cents per mile a ton on the main
stem.
Q. Is there any limit in your charter to the amount you may charge per
ton? . *"'
A. No, sir; I do not know that there is*; we^ndeavored- not to go be-
yond what we had a right to do. V *
By Mr. Dechert.—What is the date of 'youf charter?
A. I do not remember now, but somewhere about 1844 or 1845.
By Mr. Petrikin Q. What is'the cost of coal per ton at the mines, de-
livered in the cars?
A. It is sold at Mauch Chunk; the price there has been from $3 to $4
delivered on the cars; some of the time the mines were idle, but take the
whole season together, the miners, clear of all expenses, have made over
$1,100 per year.
By Mr. Olmsted Q. I understand you that yon raised your prices
upon your road simply because there was a diminution of business, and
yon had to have this increase charge on account of the diminution of busi-
ness? J .
A. That was the effect; we did it in order to get what would pay us.
Q. Is it not killing the goose that lays the golden egg?
A. No, sir; I think not, because we could not exist; we would be obliged
to go into bankruptcy if we could not pay our expenses, and we certainly
have not done that this year.
Q. Suppose there should be a still further decline in the amount to be
transported?
A. We might as well lie still as to work for nothing; the employees upon
the road, the force necessary to move the trains and keep the road in re-
pair and the shops all going, is the same nearly when we are not at work
as when we are at work, and if this state of affairs was to continue, it
would be better for us to stop altogether, according to our experience.
By Mr. White.—Q. What fields does your road carry coal from?
A. We run into all three of the regions—Lehigh, Mahanoy and part of
the Schuylkill and the Wyoming regions.
Q. What is your capacity for shipping per week—what amount of tons?
A. Our capacity is fully up to 100,000 tons; we have never quite reached
that; we have never had our stock fully employed; we have reached above
90,000 in a week; that included the coal we carried to the canals; some of
<pb>
it we delivered to the Reading railroad company, and some to the Lehigh
coal and navigation company.
By a member of the W. B. A.—Q. Has the Lehigh Valley company re-
fused cars to any operator who wanted to work since this fight commenced?
A. Not at our prices.
Q. Mr. Taggert, an operator in the Lehigh region, applied to the Lehigh.
company for cars, and was refused them up to Monday morning last?
A. That was unknown to me.
By Mr. White.—Q. What distance do you carry the coal?
A. Some of it 20 miles, some of it 100 miles.
Q. What is the fnll length of your road?
A. We have various branches; our longest road is from Wilkesbarre to
Easton; then we have various branches running into different coal regions;
from Easton to Mt. Carmel is 100 miles.
By a member of the W. B. A.—Q. What is the distance from Wilkes-
barre to Elizabethport?
A. Our road stops at Easton.
Q. Do you not make contracts to carry coal all the waj- through?
A. No, sir.
Q. Is there any understanding between you and the roads as to the price
for carrying coal at the present time?
A. We always had an understanding; we always pro rate with them.
Q. Do you give the prices on your circulars through to New York.
A. We put down what it is; we do not engage to do it at that; we have
the rate showing what the cost is to Elizabethport or Jersey City or Tren-
ton, or wherever it goes.
By Mr. Coray Q. Is there not a large amount of coal standing upon
the Lehigh sidings, ready to go forward to market?
A. No, sir, not that I know of; there may be some standing there for the
company's own use, but none to go to market that I know of.
Q. Do you not think that lower rates would bring a great deal of coal
without any loss to the company?
A. That has been our aim; our aim is to get the largest tonnage we can
carry at the lowest rates.
Q. Is it not within the knowledge of the Lehigh Valley company that
there would be a great deal of coal shipped if the price had not been raised?
A. I suppose if the operators would go in at these rates we would carry
more coal; we have carried every thing brought to us.
Q. Do you not think it would increase the tonnage, provided you put
the rates down to what they were before you raised them?
A. I do not think it would materially.
Q. Were you present at the meeting in March, 1869, in New York, when
six or seven different railroad companies were represented?
A. I do not remember the day; I was there at one time at a meeting.
Q. Was not the question then discussed, or was there not some action or
some talk that by reducing the tonnage they could keep the rates up—was
there not a committee appointed to investigate the matter and report?
A. Not that I am aware of; I did not attend the meeting for any such
purpose, because I have always been opposed to any thing of that kind.
By Mr. Olmsted Q. Is not one object that you have in raising your
rates to strengthen the hands of the operators, and to prevent some ope-
rators from going to work who otherwise would?
A. In putting the rates up we did it not with a view of increasing the
price of coal; it was with a view of getting the lowest rates and the largest
tonnage as the future result.
<pb>
Q. I mean at the present time—is not the tendency of this price to pre-
sent some operators going to work?
A. I think it has that effect; but I do not think it is to the interests of
a company or to the public that it should be done; I think if there is a
combination for the purpose of putting up the price of coal we should use
all legal measures to prevent it.
Q. Did you not act in concert with the operators when you raised the
price of transportation—did you not do it in concert with some of the
operators?
A. I think they fully agreed with us, but there was no contract.
Q. There was a common purpose?
A. That was their object, I have no doubt, and their desire.
Q. And yours, too—it was a common purpose?
A. Yes,. sir; I think it was with the view of regularity, but it was not a
combination that any body was bound by.
[The following questions were asked by a gentleman, who stated he was
a coal operator:]
Q. Has it not been represented to you that unless the price of transpor-
ttion was increased the operators would go to work?
A. Theie has been talk of that kind. •'
Q. There is no design, so far as you know, to prevent the operators
going to work—this action has not been taken to prevent the operators
making terms with the miners?
A. I say this, that we felt that we could not go to work until we felt sure,
or had seme assurance, that we could keep steadily at work; we could not
afford to go and put our force on until we knew we could be able to keep
going, and we have seen no time that we could do that.
Q. What do you think was the reason that induced the companies to
agree simultaneously to advance the freights? Was it not the fact of the
knowledge that certain operators would go to work?
A. We did what we believed was best for us to do; others thought the
same; there was no combination.
Q. How long was it after the strike commenced before the rates of freight
were advanced?
A. I do not remember now, but I think it was over a month.
Q. What appears singular is that the companies should have come to the
same conclusion at about the same time? ( 1
A. I think they all felt the necessity of it, and felt that it was necessary
for them to do what each one of them did do.
Q. Why did not the companies raise the price as soon as the strike com-
menced?
A. We had nothing to carry; when the time came we found it necessary
to know that the condition of the business was such that we could go to
work.
Q. Do you not think it would relieve great suffering in the city of New
York to carry coal?
A. I think the people in the city of New York have had their coal within
reasonable rates—that is, so far as it comes from the operators or com-
panies; I think that the price of coal there has not been from the action
of the operators or railroad companies; I am satisfied that neither the
operators nor the railroads could go to work with any safety to them-
selves, unless they could be assured, or have some better assurance, that
they could continue to work, because they could not incur the expenses ne-
cessary to start work if it is to stop in a month.
<pb>
Q. I think you stated that the expense of running and remaining idle
was about the same?
A. Very nearly the same.
Q. You have to keep the road open for passengers and merchandize?
A. Yes, sir; and we cannot live on that alone very well.
Q. The increased expense would be simply the running of the trains and
the steam power?
A. It would be the expense of taking our men back and opening a trade
that we could not live by.
By Mr. White Q. Have the collieries along the line of the road all
suspended?
A. There is a little coal that is going away—I think from 8,000 to 10,000
tons a week, from a few collieries.
Q. Some of the collieries have suspended entirely?
A. Pretty much all of them.
By Mr. Olmsted Your company is a coal mining as well as transpor-
tation company?
A. No, sir; simply a transportation company.
Q. Have you any interest in coal mines?
A. I am an owner of coal mines—not an operator.
By Mr. Petrikin Q. You receive a royalty?
A. Yes, sir.
By M/r. Siney About how many tons do you carry from the Wyoming
region? M. .
A. That is more than I can tell you.
Q. Do you know if there is any difficulty at all between the men and the
operators In the Wyoming region—is there any difficulty between them
except the railroad?
A. I have understood there was; J have not been there.
Q. Did you hear that any coal' operator there offered any lower price to
the men—any change of price at all?
A. I am not familiar with that; I have not been there?
By Mr. White What is to be the end of all this, in your opinion?
A. Really, I do not know; I am a little like Mr. Gowen about that; we
have no enmity to the association ; my opinion is that it would be better
if there was a board of arbitration, to settle all questions that might rise.
By Mr. Olmsted.—Q. Your present idea is to tight it out on this line if
it takes all summer?
A. I do not see anything left for us to do but that; if there is any other
way, I would like to know it.
By a member of the W. B. A Q. Will the gentleman state how much
cheaper the consumer would get the coal if the men worked for nothing?
A. 'We do not ask that; I can only speak of our own region; the mines
there for the last year, when coal was pretty low—most of the time lower
than for years before the whole season through—the miners there, from
the statements I have seen, averaged from $4 to $5 per day.
Q. Do you mean all the miners, or a few among the many 1
A. All I can say is that the statements I saw were taken just as they
came from the books; they took thirty names; some made more and some
less, but the average was about that; the statement was made up and pre-
sented to me; I do not present the exact figures; the different months were
added together, and divided by thirty, and each man had over $1,100 for
the year—nearly $100 a month.
Q. Are you aware whose books they were taken from?
A. Some that I saw were from Sharp, Weiss & Co., from the Jeddo
I
1
<pb>
mines, from the Hazleton company; there were several of them; all the
principal miners; there were thirty from each colliery.
Q. Do you know how many men were employed in each of these col-
lieries?
A. I do not,
E. W. Clark, president of the Lehigh coal and navigation company, "being
called, testified:
By a member of the W. B. A—Q. Fow many men are employed in
these collieries just named?
A. I suppose the statement that Judge Packer has referred to was sub-
mitted to me; every miner who mined by contract in the collieries named,
earned an average of $1,100 for the year 1810; in one colliery every miner
who worked over two months earned $73 per month; every man earned
$73 for the month.
Q. I am referring to the Hazleton region 1
A. There are no reliable data; there a few miners working by contract;
I have not heard of one case where they earned less than $3 per day, six
or seven hours a day; I should think it would be well to take the pay-rolls
©f all collieries; each pay-roll shows the net amount paid to each miner,
after paying all charges. f
By Mr. Olmsted.—Q. Do you mean in this colliery you speak of they
earned $1,100 net?
A. That was net, not taking in the rent; in some cases the companies
do not own the houses; in our case we own nearly all of them.
By a member of the W. B. A.—Q. Do you say that in your collieries
every man averaged $1,100 last year?
A. No, sir; we were not working all the mont hs. i
By Mr. Olmsted Q. On what basis was that?
A. The Lehigh region is working on the Elizabethport basis; when coal
sold at $5 per ton at Elizabethport, we paid, in our mines, about fifty-five
cents per ton for cutting the coal; the other expenses connected with pre-
paring it and loading it into the cars has usually reached a little more than
double that price; that is at the mines. . -
By a member of the W. B. A—Q. Do you say that you pay for putting
the coal into the cars after it is cut, besides paying the fifty-five cents?
A. The other expenses are considered to cost about double the price of
cutting the coal.
Q. Has not the miner got to load the coal, or hire a man to do it, and
pay for it?
A. Certainly.
By Mr. Olmsted Q. Does that come out of the net amount?
A. No, sir; that is the net amount; I do not want the committee to un-
derstand that is the usual case; I do not think many of the miners earned
as much as that; there are plenty of them who earned pretty near that.
Q. When the mining country is in general operation what do you suppose
is the average price per day that a good miner earns?
"A. I think that when coal is worth $5 in New York the average of all
contract miners in the whole region would be four dollars.
Q. Just for his day's labor? »*
A. Yes. sir, after paying every thing out of it, through the whole an-
thracite region. That is the impression; we have no data.
'By a member of W- B. A.—How many miners have you working on con-
tract, including the gangway-men?
<pb>
A. I have not the data before me to give the exact number. My impres-
sion is that we have not more than 150 contract miners.
Q. You say that the miners get, for loading and cutting the coal, fifty-five
cents per ton; how much does that weigh?
A. 2,240 pounds.
Q. How many feet is in that car?
A. Our standard car is about seventy-six cubic feet, top.
Q. Are you not aware that some fifteen or sixteen collieries around Hazle-
ton allow forty-eight cubic feet for a ton of coal?
A. Yes, sir, I am.
John Siney, being called, made the following statement:
Mr. Gowen has made charges that we never expected to hear from him
or any other gentleman. For that reason I think it has become my duty,
as one of the officers of the association of which I am a member, to bring
in talent to meet these charges and try to rebut them. I do not propose
to enter into figures and give the result of prices. I am willing to accept
their books, and I will bring the men who work in the collieries where these
figures have been asked. Mr. Gowen has said we are a band of conspira-
tors ; the papers have so denounced us. I do not fell like letting that state-
ment go out without trying to rebut it. Mr. Gowen knows that was the
joint recommendation of the two committees, [referring to the paper pre-
sented by Mr. Gowen,] with a distinct understanding that the Reading road
should come down to something near an equitable price for transportation.
Mr. Gowen said it met his approval, but he distinctly said it was premature
to announce what he intended to do then. He says, again, that I said that
I would resign the position I hold if the men did not come to a certain ar-
rangement. That I grant; but, sir, when he made that statement he must
of known that the men came to it. The men did come to it and made the
proposition, but they forced us to come down to $2. They forced the men
to work by the day for a little over $9 a week. This was submitted to the
association, and they agreed to come to that in order to avoid this issue.
Between the 7th of November and the 10th of January the three large
companies offered to the men about forty-five cents reduction, a proposition
which the men refused. When they saw 2,000,000 tons more in the market
than was required, the Scranton companies brought down their price to
such a pitch that men who will be here said it was impossible for Schuyl-
kill to accept those prices, and a partial suspension took place. In regard
to the price of coal, I have never yet met the operator who said there was
anything in the trade when coal goes below $2 50.
Apart from that, we are stigmatized as being lead by a few. Here is a
direct vote from the people, from the various branches of the association.
[Witness produces paper showing vote.] I challenge Mr. Gowen, as a
lawyer and a resident in our county, or any other man, to name one out-
rage which has been committed that can be traced to this association which
I represent. When these charges are made, and go out to the world, gen-
tlemen should be prepared to prove them. I do not wish to occupy your
time. We accept the figures of the companies; but I do protest against
allowing any operator to select a few men in his employ, and say that is an
average. If you please, I will take the Anthracite Board of Trade, and
stake the issue on the men in their employ, and compare with figures with
any individual operator, and place the issue between those two. Schuyl-
kill will accept what those companies gave to the men when we were out
four months last year, and resume work to-morrow; we were willing to ac-
cept the basis of $3—when coal is $3—within ninety-three miles of Philadel-
<pb>
3B
phia. We are willing to accept that, and if the operators say thay cannot
pay it, we do not want them to pay it. We have never asked them, as an
organization, to pay more than has been in the trade.
I won't advance any figures to-night. I ask that we be allowed the right
of bringing in a legal defendant here.
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. Do you know of the existence of a secret society,
in Schuylkill county, amonst the miners?
A. I wish to be placed upon my oath. As workingmeu we are stigma-
tized as a band of assassins; anything coming from our lips is supposed
not to be believed.; I know of none; I have heard say that such a thing
is in it; I do not know a solitary man belonging to it.
Q. Is it generally believed there is such a society in that region?
A. It has been taken for granted that there has been, long before this or-
ganization was organized; we are an organization; we were first chartered
by the county, next by the Legislature; to-day we have neither sign, pass-
word, oath nor pledge, and we do not know each other when we meet in the
streets.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. Have you not always heard, ever since you have been
in Schuylkill county, that there were secret societies that committed out
rages?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have not you heard three times that attempts have been made to
throw our trains. from the track?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have not you heard that a man, at Trevorton, was killed in this way,
eight weeks ago?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have not you heard that a man at Mt. Carmel was shot and his house
blown up in the night?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Don't you know that the offence of those men was working outside
of what other men thought was right 1
A. I do not know, but I have seen it in the Miners' Journal.
Q. Do you know any other reason why these men were killed than that
they had been working outside of what other men thought was right—did
you ever hear any body charge them with other crimes?
A. I have heard members of the association say that they were not
members of the association; it is the current report, in papers, that these
men were not members of the association; but that is not in the county
which I represent; Schuylkill has been made the butt in this connection.
Q. You stated just now that you never wanted the operators to work at
a price at which they could not afford to produce coal, but that you wanted
$3 as a minimum. How did you intend to prevent them from selling coal
at less than $3? Was not your cure to order a suspension?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Is it not an object, and has it not always been an object, of your so-
ciety, to keep the price of coal up to about $3 per ton at Port Carbon, by
stopping when it got below that?
St. Yes, sir.
Q. Suppose you order a general suspension and any colliery that belongs
to your society commenced work, what would happen?
A. We would sever all connection of them with the association.
Q. If twenty collieries in Schuylkill county will agree to go to work at
this rate, will you let the men of your association work there?
3
<pb>
A. If they feel so disposed; if they do, we will sever all connection
with them.
Q. Won't you issue an order that those collieries must stop?
A. No, sir.
Q. Have you not issued orders that collieries must stop because some of
the members that worked there had violated a rule of your association?
A. Officially, I say no, never.
Q. Don't you know that a colliery in your own town was forced to stop
because it employed three or four men who had worked against the orders
of your society? I speak of Kendrick's colliery. Has not your society
repeatedly ordered men to leave and quit work at a colliery where three or
four other men worked who had violated the orders of your association?
A. When the orders of the association are violated we request the men
to sever all connection with the parties doing it.
Q. Have not you issued a direct order that certain collieries shall close
when men worked who had violated the orders of the association?
A. Officially, I say no.
Q. Don't you know that you have ordered collieries to stop, and the men
had to leave them, because one or two men worked there that were ob-
noxious to your society?
A. I say I have never done it.
Q. Don't you know because Kendrick & , at the Sinclair shaft,
gave work to four men who had worked during a suspension, against the
orders of your society, that their whole colliery had to stop until they dis-
charged those men—don't you know it?
A. No, sir, I don't. I hold but one position—as president in the county
in which I live. Reports have said that these men forced the colliery to
stop. The minutes on the books of that district, by resolution, asked the
men if they were willing to work as long as those men were there, and the
members of that branch said no by vote, consequently the members of the
association quit work at that colliery.
Q. Because Kendrick employed men that had once worked when there
was a strike 1
A. Yes, sir; the men refused to work so long as certain men were in it.
Q. Is it not a rule of your society that if one of its members does not
pay his dues and works at a certain colliery, that colliery has got to stop
until his dues are paid?
A. I do not wish to commit myself or the association; I emphatically
say that when members of the association violate any of the laws thereof,
then we cease to recognize them as members.
Q. That is not an answer to my question. Does it not result in every
one who is a member of your society ceasing work?
A. It is the case.
Q. Have you not got a rule in your society that forbids any member of
it to speak disrespectfully of its orders?
A. Yes, sir; we have got a rule which prohibits members from making
charges against members or officers unless they can substantiate them.
Q. Or speaking disrespectfully of them?
A. I won't say exactly. [Witness reads rule from constitution.]
Q. You cannot pifnish them in any other way than to fine them'!
A. That is all.
Q. If that man fined don't pay his fine, does not every member of the
association working at the colliery that he is working at refuse to work at
that colliery until he pays his fine?
A. No, sir, not generally.
<pb>
Q. Has it not been the case?
A. Yes, sir, I suppose so.
By a member of the W. B. A.—Q. Did you ever hear of any outrages
being committed in Luzerne county at the time the men were working in
Schuylkill county I
A. Not to my knowledge.
C. Did you ever hear it?
A. Yes, sir; I have heard about certain parties shooting through the
houses of people somewhere in the Lehigh region; they were parties put
up to bring the association into disrepute.
Q. Did you ever hear any person say who was supposed to do this?
A. The supposition was that some of the police did it.
Q. The State police?
A. The constables.
James Kealy, president of the W. B. A., being called, made the follow-
ing statement:
The gentlemen representing the wealth of the mining regions, the rolling
stock, &c., and the legal adviser of the coal operators, started out by tell-
ing this committee how much money and wealth he represented. I wish to
remark that we don't represent any money; we represent forty thousand
miners and laborers; we represent their interests and views. We want to
have a fair understanding in this matter, and have the reporters take down
everything said, and let it go the public, for them to judge of the i«sue
between us. We have never had a fair hearing since the organization of
this association. We have sent letters and statements to the press but
they would not publish them. We could find the statements furnished by
this gentleman (Mr. Gowen) coming forth every week from the public press;
our statements could not be issued. The Philadelphia Inquirer and Press,
the New York Tribune and Herald, those papers that circulate all over the
United States, could have statements from those gentlemen, but not from
us. Therefore, I say that I am glad this investigation has been ordered,
so that our case can go to the public and show that we are not a band of
conspirators.
An assertion has been made by the representative of one of the carrying
companies that you cannot expect that he is going to carry 12,000 tons of
coal as cheap as 180,000 tons. Are we to judge from this that a stage
line running between the two points should charge as much for three passen-
gers as for twenty? That statement is made to throw the odium of this
suspension upon the workingmen. It is too terrible a crime to rest at our
door. We won't have it. We want that crime to rest upon the originators
of it. It has been stated here that an advance of per cent. has been
offered to the workingmen for the month of January by this combination
of capital, provided that they would succeed in getting the Luzerne region
to suspend.
I asked the question, what would be the price of coal to the consumer,
provided the workingmen produced the coal for nothing? I got no definite
answer. He has told you what it would cost to produce coal and put it
into the breaker, and you must take that much from $9 90, and the balance
is divided between the carrying company and the coal operator. I wish to
make this statement to show that the miners are not the parties that make
the coal dear. This association has done more to make coal cheap; it is
their aim to make the trade as steady as possible. Coal operators have
told us that if the workingmen could not steady the trade it was impossi-
ble for the coal operators to do so. The operators would cut each others'
<pb>
\
throats for twenty-five cents on the ton, but if the miners passed a resolu-
tion to suspend they would abide by it. This was the statement that was
made to me. If the men cannot control this trade the operators cannot do
so. They try to throw the odium of the suspension, since it has become a
curse, upon the workingmen.
The question was asked of the honorable president of the Reading rail-
road company, could any persons work provided this toll was taken off?
If any answer was made I did not understand it thoroughly. They say
this strike has been raised to prevent certain operators from working. Ia
the part of the country I come from—Columbia county—every place there
would be working to-day, and from the loth of February, if it had not been
for the rates of toll. When the 15th of February came we notified our
operators that we were ready to make some arrangements whereby we could.
resume. We were told that we could not resume on account of the rates
on the Reading railroad. I want to know whether we work for the opera-
tors or the Reading railroad company. I would like to know who is asking
this officious gentlemen to step in between us and say " I am the arbitrator
in this matter." We want to settle the matter between ourselves. We
have not asked interference.
I was going to ask the gentleman some questions, but I don't deem it
necessary. I thought it would be recognizing a part of what he stated.
When he refers to outrages in the coal region he should know that the coal
region has been more quiet since the organization of the association than
before. At each of their meetings they must at all times speak respect-
fully of their employers. If a committee is appointed on wages they are
instructed how they shall act and speak. Yet we are told that we are con-
spirators. We intend to put the saddle on the other horse. The con-
spiracy rests on the other side. The Reading railroad company has learned
that it can advance its tolls as much as it pleases, and that the laws of this
State have nothing to do with them; you cannot interfere with them. This
!< mandate that is put forth.
Before this organization the miners would strike in one colliery or another;
somebody was always striking; the men were at the mercy of anybody;
three or four would want an advance of wages and stop; they would go away
out of the coal region, and when inquired for they could not be found.
This was the state of affairs prior to the existence of the association. The
consequence was, the names of those men were put into the hands of the
operators, with the request l,I dont want you to employ these men; they
are striking at my colliery." Perhaps you think this is over-drawn, but
we come here to substantiate every word we say. [Witness reads aflida-
vits.] I have got several of these; I can get 150 of them.
I have also to refer to the statement of the gentleman about the men
making five dollars a day at the $2 50 basis. We can produce evidence to
show that at the $3 00 basis two miners had worked 26 days in the month,
and they earned what? They had eight dollars legacy of a debt. They
went to the operator, and what did he say? "You must put the hard and
soft together." This was the consolation to the miner. Gentlemen refer
to the pitiful condition of the orphans. What are the facts? Have Ave ever
seen an operator give a dollar to bury them when they die? Have we ever
i-een them give them a shoe to put upon their feet when the snow was on
the ground? Did they say "your father has been killed in making wealth
for the Reading railroad company, and we will help you?" They cannot
tome hero and ever tell me they have ever done it. I have been at the
business ever since I was ten years old, except for four years when I was
fighting the rebels, and I find it is a little worse now thau when I went to
<pb>
fight the rebels. The matter stands thus: There is a combination of $300,-
000,000 arrayed against the hard workingmen of the State. This is the
fight of the United States; this is labor against capital, not only for the
miners but for the United States at large. If we have to submit it will be
a submission of labor the world over.
Let us see what this terrible baud of conspirators has done. Every win-
ter, since this society has been organized, the poor widow whose husband
was killed in the mines by an untimely fall of coal or slate, that poor woman
has received sufficient to support herself and children all winter. We have
in a great many districts paid for the education of the sons of the men
killed in the mines. Show me that man here to-night with his hair as white
as snow. Has he ever taken one poor miner's son and given him an edu-
cation? No. But he has built colleges for the elite to be educated in.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. You say the operators and railroad companies are
to blame for this suspension—who ordered the suspension to take place on
the 13th of January; by whose order was the work stopped?
A. By the order of the president of the General Council of the Wojk-
ingman's Benevolent association. A delegation of the miners, represent-
ing 40,000 men, assembled and took a vote, and they resolved unanimously,
that the work should cease until such time as it would pay to work.
Q. Then the suspension was ordered by the Workingmen's Benevolent
association?
A. Yes, sir.- •
Q. In the Lehigh region was there any dispute about wages at that time?
A. I did not hear the men say there was.
Q. The operators were willing to pay all they asked?
A. I don't know about that.
Q. Don't you know from what you have heard that there was no dis-
pute?
A. I tell you they voted very unanimously to suspend work, the Lehigh
delegates included.
Q. The Grand Council ordered the suspension?
A. It is a General Council?
Q. They ordered the suspension?
A. Their people vote at home, and according to their vote they instruct
the delegates. Our association is organized purely on democratic princi-
ples.
Q. You admit that it was the Workingmen's Benevolent association.
through their delegates in this General Council, that ordered the suspension?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you know that there was any dispute in the Lehigh region at that
time about wages.
A. 1 never heard.
Q. Did you know of any dispute in Schuylkill?
A. I believe the men were working; there was no issue between the
operators and men.
Q. Was not the suspension ordered for tne sole purpose of putting up
the price of coal, and to prevent production in the meantime?
A. I believe that was the object.
Q. On the 15th of February, when you ordered a resumption, did not
you know that the men of Schuylkill county, before that, at a meeting oi'
their organization at Tamaqua, had demanded the three dollar basis as a
minimum?
A. I don't know anything about that.
Q. Don't you know it?
<pb>
A. I don't think I remember.
Q. Haven't you also heard that, at that meeting of the Schuylkill county
delegates, they insisted that the operators should come before the working-
men and swear to the correctness of their accounts?
A. No, sir.
By Mr. Petrikin Q. How do you expect to cure this evil?
A. Since a third party got into this question, since we are amenable to
them more than to the men we work for, I have no solution of the difflculy;
but if we were working and only responsible to the coal operator, we might
offer a solution; we are willing this matter should be tried by you, and
settled.
By Mr. Olmsted Q. You admit that this suspension was ordered for the
purpose of raising the price of coal. Did your association have any un-
derstanding with the operators to suspend for the purpose of raising the
price 1
A. Yes, sir; it was thoroughly understood that the men should get six-
teen and a-half in my county for the month of January, 1871, provided
they succeeded in bringing out all on suspension.
Q. With whom was that understanding?
A. The operators of Schuylkill county.
Q. Did you have any understanding, at the time of this strike, with the
Anthracite Board of Trade; did they desire you to act 1
A. I never treated with them.; it is only Schuylkill that does that.
Q. Did you act with any board of operators who wanted you strike, to
put up coal?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many?
A. All the operators in our valley—Centralia borough—five or six col-
lieries.
Q.- Do jtou know, as a matter of fact, that there was any more general
understanding with the operators than what you speak of?
A. I could not say; all I learned about Schuylkill was through Mr. Siney.
By Mr. White.—Q. How do you know there was an understanding about
Centralia?
A. I know everything about the society there.
Q. Did you consult with the operators about that result?
A. I did not; the committee did, and made report to our association.
By Mr. Decherl.—Q. How did your committee effect this arrangement
with the operators?
A. They treated with the operators; there are only six operators there;
there is one of them that governs the whole.
Q. Who are those operators 1
A. J. M. Frick, Gurrell & Co., John Anderson & Co., De Haven & Co.,
Morris, Robinson & Co., and Purcell & Co.
Q. Which is the one you designate as the leader?
A. Mr. Gurrell.
By Mr. Davis Q. As president of the association, did you learn of any
other operators who favored the strike?
A. No, sir.
Q. What did you learn as president of the association?
A. That it was thoroughly understood in Schuylkill county that in case
the suspension was general, the wages for January would be raised 16\
per cent. and 24| per cent. in Schuylkill. The operators said if Schuylkill,
Luzerne and Carbon came out they would make it general.
Q. Was this said by the operators before the strike had been threatened?
<pb>
A. I think it was before the strike.
Q. Before it was threatened.
A. No.
Q. What do you mean by the operators in Schuylkill county?
A. Those represented by what is called the Anthracite Board of Trade;
I refer to them when I talk of operators.
By Mr. White Q. When was this understanding?
A. I believe it was immediately before this last suspension.
Q. Have they been consulted since?
A. Oh, yes; we told them on the 15th of February that we were ready
to resume work; they said they could not start because the Reading rail-
road company would not let them. Mr. Gurrell was ready to start on the
$3 00 basis. I cannot say in regard to Schuylkill.
Q. What is your business?
A. I am a miner and reside at Centralia.
By Mr. Olmsted—Q. You claim that the Workingmen's association and
the operators are in concert and harmony now?
A. I don't swear any such thing.
A. You say they were in harmony when the strike commenced?
A. They were not in harmony; there was no definite understanding;
this was offered and they got it; there was no agreement; it was a mere
understanding.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. Don't you mean that the understanding about the
strike was about the wages for the month of January?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Was not the understanding this, that you were to get the $2 50 basis
no longer, provided the other regions worked?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Was it not the case, if the strike continued in the Wyoming region,
the price of coal for the thirteen days you worked in January, would have
been higher than if those regions had been at work?
A. I don't know; my opinion is that they would not have paid at the
rate at that time, unless it advanced.
Q. Was not the arrangement you speak of an arrangement for the month
of January?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did you ever have any arrangement with the operators in your region
that you should go into a strike?
A. No, sir; not a written agreement.
Q. Did you consult with them in order to know whether you should order
this strike?
A. No, sir.
Q. The arrangement you were speaking of was as to the amount of
wages you should be paid in January?
A. They were to have an advance for the ten days in January, if this
proviso was put in; they agreed to pay the men on the $3 00 basis, pro-
vided the other regions kept out, and if they went to work they were to
have the $2 50 basis.
The committee then adjourned until to-morrow evening at eight o'clock.
<pb>
Harrisburg, Thursday, March 9, 1871.
The committee met at 8 o'clock P. M., all the members being present.
Hon. L. W. Hall appeared as counsel for the complainant, and desired
to know whether it was true that the night before an attack had been made
on the Workingmen's Benevolent association by the president of the Read-
ing railroad company.
Mr. Gowen contended that he had done nothing of the kind.
Mr. Hall then requested that the resolution be read under which the com-
mittee were acting, and the resolution was read. He contended that the
duties of the committee were confined simply to the inquiry of whether any
of the railroad companies had violated their charters or the law of the land.
Mr. Olmsted thought that the resolution covered the whole ground.
Mr. Davis said he thought the resolution contemplated something else
than a bare question of law. The committee were authorized to send for
persons and papers.
Mr. Gowen was then called to the stand by Mr. Hall.
Franklin B. Gowen, having been sworn, testified as follows:
By Mr. Hall.—Q. State whether you are president of the Reading rail-
road company?
A. I am.
Q. How long have you been president of that company?
A. Since last May a year, I think, or the latter part of last April a year.
Q. Will you be pleased to give me the schedule of freights on the Read-
ing railroad on the 1st of January, this y^ar?
A. I can give you the rate from Port Carbon to Philadelphia. I cannot
give the schedule of all the rates. On the 1st of January the rate was
$2 08 per ton from Port Carbon to Philadelphia.
Q. How many miles is that?
A. Ninety-three miles. It was $2 from Schuylkill Haven to Philadel-
phia—89 miles.
Q. What are the rates of freight now from Port Carbon to Philadelphia
per ton?
A. $6 08.
Q. For the same kind of articles?
A. A ton of coal, yes.
Q. Is that the rate on other things than on coal?
A. That I could not tell you; there are four different classes of merchan-
dize—first, second, third and fourth class; then there are two classes called
A and B, which consist of heavy goods, such as iron ore, railroad iron, &c,
and those vary. The price for carrying a ton of iron is much less than for
carrying a ton of feather beds. There are six different rates, but there are,
perhaps, five hundred articles which are divided into those six different
rates.
Q. Have you increased the rates of freight in the time named on any of
those four different classes, except coal?
A. Not that I know of; not at all in the way it has been increased on
coal. There is hardly a week passes but what some new rate is made upon
a particular article. The general agent may issue a new rate upon some
particular class of goods. On the 1st of January the rates on other arti-
cles than coal were reduced; on the 1st of January a new tariff went into
force on other articles; the general effect was to reduce; some remained
the same. .
<pb>
Q. The rates, proportionately, on the road for coal now are, as between
Port Carbon and Philadelphia?
A. How do you mean, with reference to other stations?
Q. Yes.
A. Not exactly proportionately, for this reason: In making the charges*
on coal there is a certain constant quantity assumed for each ton, and that
constant quantity is the same on the $6 charge as on the $2 charge. There
is added to that constant quantity a rate per mile.
Q. Has the Reading company in comtemplation to increase the rates of
toll on coal in addition to the tolls now enforced?
A. No, sir.
Q. Is it not in contemplation to do this, provided the collieries now in
operation in Schuylkill county do not suspend?
A. No, sir; nothing of the kind was ever suggested, or ever entered my
brain for a moment.
Q. You claim that you have the right to charge freight and toll both un-
der your charter, do you? .
A. We claim that the restriction in the charter to four cents per ton per
mile on toll simply is a restriction for the use of the road bed when the
transportation is done by parties other than ourselves, and that our right
to charge for the motive power and use of cars is not restricted at all by
the charter. That position, I think, has been sustained by a recent de-
cision.
Q. Then there is no restriction in your charter as to the rates of freight
you can charge?
A. If you ask me that question simply as a witness, to determine what
is in the written charter, my recollection is that there is not. The charter,
of course, would be the best evidence. I think there is no restriction ex-
cept on tolls.
Q. When did I understand you to say this increase was made from $2 08
to $6 OS?
A. The charge was first increased to $4 08, and that, I think, was some-
time about the middle of February. The advance to $6 08 was made sub-
sequently, probably ten days; I cannot give you the exact date, probably
ten days subsequent to the advance to $4 08.
Q. Will you tell me, as you are no doubt familiar with all these things,
what the price of pea coal was at Port Carbon on the 1st of March?
A. I cannot tell you; not more than $1 25 or $1 50.
Q. What is the freight on that pea coal to Philadelphia?
A. $6 08.
Q. On that which you say does not bring at that place more than $1 25
or $1 50? i
A. It is generally $1 25; this price [referring to a paper] is not at Port
Carbon; it is at the mines, about 14 or 15 miles, in the way we generally
carry the coal.
Q. What is your rate for the 14 or 15 miles?
A. 1^ cents per mile when we can have trade; this requires the use of a
large inclined plane, which we never use unless we have 6,000 or 7,000 tons
per day; unless that is the case we carry it through a tunnel, a more cir-
cuitous way, some 24 or 25 miles.
Q. Then the price of this particular coal at Port Carbon would be, in
your judgment, on the 1st of March, how much?
A. It is generally about $1 00 to $1 50; pea coal is the smallest kind of
coal that is screened out of the dirt, and almost half of it is thrown away;
it is only when coal is at a pretty fair price that they can afford to sell it.
<pb>
Q. You charge as freight for pea coal from Port Carbon to Philadelphia
the same as you charge for chestnut, or sizes above chestnut?
A. Yes, sir; it requires as much labor; pea coal ought to pay a higher
price than any other; a large eight-wheel car, that will hold 14 tons of
. lump, will not hold more than 10 of pea coal.
Q. Has the transportation increased or decreased on your road since
the suspension of these coal men?
A. When the suspension first took place, on the 10th of January, the
tonnage fell off very rapidly, down to 6,000 or 12,000 tons a week of an-
thracite coal, and since the middle of February, since we have charged
these high rates, the tonnage has increased very much. Our bituminous
tonnage has not been at all affected by the strike; the bituminous tonnage
comes from the Broad Top region, and we take it from Dauphin to Phila-
delphia, by way of Reading.
Q. What are your charges for carrying bituminous coal 93 miles?
A. We do not carry any bituminous coal that way; bituminous coal
comes upon our road just above Harrisburg; we carry it from there to
Philadelphia; the rate is established by the Pennsylvania railroad; I don't
suppose the entire rate from Broad Top to Philadelphia, out of which we
get our pro rata and allowance for car service, is more than $3 00 to $3 50
for the whole distance.
Q. You are obliged to carry that so cheap on account of the rule of the
Pennsylvania railroad?
A. They fix the rate and we take our pro rata out of it; we have a con-
tract with them.
Q. You have that with other companies, don't you, for coal?
A. No, sir, none whatever; we never make any special contracts for car-
rying any thing whatever.
Q. You carry bituminous coal from Huntingdon to Philadelphia for more
than one-half as little as you carry anthracite coal from Port Carbon to
Philadelphia?
A. At present we do; and if the suspension should continue for a much
longer time we would carry the bituminous coal for nothing, in order that
the people should not get out of coal, and to prevent a coal famine in the
large cities.
Q. Be pleased to state whether you have done that this winter when the
famine did exist in the large cities?
A. I did not know there was a famine.
Q. Did you do it this winter?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you make any reduction at all on that item since the first of
January?
A. No, none whatever.
Q. Was there an arrangement made between you and the Lehigh Valley
roads and the roads leading to the north that carry anthracite coal, at the
time you increased the rates of freight from $2 08 to $4 08, or from that
up to $6 08!
A. No arrangement at all in the way of a contract that was drawn up by
either party. I told the other parties that we intended to make that in-
crease, and stated very plainly that we would make it whether they did or
not, because we had done the same thing on our own account in July last,
when a similar state of affairs existed.
Q. Did you agree or did you not agree with these companies to do this
before you made that increase?
A. We did not agree with them; I told them we were going to do it.
<pb>
Q. Be pleased to state whether there was not an understanding between
you and them, at the time you made this increase, that they were also to
do it?
A. None but what I am now about to tell you. I told them that we
would make that increase; they said they'would also make an increase in
rates; that is all.
Q. Did'nt they agree to make the same increase that you did?
A. Not at all.
Q. Have they increased to the. same rate?
A. I could not really tell you what rate of increase tbey have made upon
their charges, nor was the rate that they were to make at all taken into
consideration at the time this meeting took place.
Q. You mean by you?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Didn't they take into consideration what you did?
A. I can not tell what their thoughts or actions were; I told them we
intended to make this increase.
Q. Had not you a meeting with those railroad officials in Philadelphia
prior to the time this increase was made?
A. No, sir; the increase was made sometime before.
Q. And put in force on your tariff?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And not on their's?
A. On their's, too; we had meetings in New York before that.
Q. Didn't you meet these same men in New York and agree to this be-
fore it was done 1
A. I met those gentlemen in New York two or three times, running
through two or three weeks, and told them, upon one of those occasions,
that we intended to make this increase.
Q. That is not the question I asked.
A. I will give you no other answer than the truth; that is all that was
done.
Q. Did not these railroad officials inform you, when you informed them
what you were going to do, that they would do the same thing before they
or you did it?
A. They informed me that they would do it.
Q. Before you or they did it?
A. Yes, sir; I told them that we intended to make this rate; then the
Lehigh Valley and the Lehigh navigation company said they would make
the advance; there was no one asked to do so, nor do I know whether
there were any others made the advance than the Lehigh Valley and the
Lehigh navigation company.
Q. Have they made an advance outside of their charter?
A. I don't know what their charter is.
Q. Don't you know that these railroad companies made the request of
the Northern Central railroad company to raise their rates correspondingly,
so that they could shut out the coal from the Shamokin region?
A. I do not know that at all, nor anything about it; I don't think any-
thing occurred between the Northern Central company and any of us ex-
cept through myself; I called at the Pennsylvania railroad office; I don't
know what they did; I have a knowledge of something occurring between
the Northern Central company and myself.
Q. Did you state, or did you not state to operators in Schuylkill county,
that if they did not quit mining coal you would raise their rates so high
that you would absolutely prohibit them from getting it shipped?
<pb>
A. Never anything of the kind to anybody.
Q. Yo never stated so to anybody?
A. No, sir; not that I know of; I would like very much to know if, in
the mind of any persons, there is an opinion that I did say so.
Q. You desire that I shall call your attention to that fact?
A. Certainly.
[Mr. Hall said he would call the attention of witness to it at another
meeting.]
Witness.—J have stated over and over again to operators that unless
work was resumed generally we would raise our tolls.
Q. You would raise them higher than now?
A. Oh, no; that was before we raised.
Q. I asked if you said you would raise them higher than now?
A. Oh, no, sir; on the contrary, I have told a number that we would
not raise them higher than they are now.
Q. Why?
A. Because they are high enough.
Q. Will you tell me, as the president of the Reading railroad, whether
you regard this as good policy—the raising of the rates on coal to $6 08
per ton for ninety-three miles?
A. It think it is excellent policy for the company, for without it the bu-
siness furnished to it would be so little that it would become bankrupt, as
would be the case when we are incurring an expense of $500,000 to $600,-
000 a month, and are receiving less than $200,000, for carrying coal.
Q. It is the exchequer of the Reading railroad that you have principally
at heart?
A. Yes, sir; entirely.
Q. Did you state last night, in your speech to the gentlemen composing
this committee, that you could carry 180,000 tons of coal as cheap as 12,000
tons?
A. I did not; I said the only difference between the rates of carrying
180,000 tons and 12,000 tons a week was the increased expense of the train
hands which carried it, and the wear and tear of the roads and machinery.
Q. How much would that be a ton?
A. It would be about thirty-one cents a ton, I suppose, because all the
stationary expenses of the roads, the station agents, officers, tind all other
expenses, must go on.
Q. Then it would cost you at the rate of thirty-one cents a ton to carry
this large quantity more than it would cost to carry the small quantity?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you propose, under your present arrangement, to make the small
quantity pay all that you would get on the large?
A. We are obliged to do it; we do not do it because we want to; the
rate we get on the amount we are carrying now does not pay us hardly
anything; whereas, if we carried the quantity we are prepared to trans-
port, at an average of $1 50 per ton, we should make a great deal of money.
Q. Then why don't you make a great deal of money by carrying the
large quantity?
A. Because the Workingmen's society has refused to work unless they
are paid a rate of wages which would entirely prevent the operators from
working.
Q. And let them live—is that what you mean?
A. No, I don't mean that; I mean that they could get the same wages
they got last year, and that every good miner, at the rate of wages offered,
could make $4 00 a day, clear of all expenses.
<pb>
Q. You say that you expect to make the 12,000 tons pay as much as the
180,000 tons would pay?
A. No, sir, I didn't jsay that; the 12,000 tons, at $6 08, would be onlv
$72,960, whereas the 180,000 tons, at $1 5Q, would be $270,000.
Q. As far as you can, you are making this policy pay for what you could
have made?
A. Not at all, because we might have increased the tolls to $20 00 a ton,
and that would pay more; I am only doing it to such an extent as to make
enough money to pay the expenses we incur.
Q. If you carry but a small quantity of coal at $6 08 per ton for 93
miles, how much would carry if it was $20 a ton?
A. I don't think that we would carry any.
Q. Then would you make any money?
A. No, sir; I suppose at $10 we would carry some—not so much as at
$6 or $8.
Q. Would not you make more at $2 00?
A. I do not think, at $2 00, within the last two or three weeks, we would
have carried more than we do; we carried last week 37,000 tons, and I
think that is as much as the outside collieries, who do not belong to the
Board of Trade, could produce at any rate of tolls.
Q. You say that it requires men and agents, and track and cars, and all
that kind of thing, as much for 1,000 tons as many thousands; would not
that be the case if you did not carry any coal at all?
A. Yes, sir; not to such a great extent; there are expenses solely for the
coal trade; at Richmond there has been an expenditure of five or six mil-
lions of dollars, solely for coal; we do not charge for the wharves.
Q. In distributing them you distribute to the same men from year to
year?
A. Not always; we give them to those who represent the collieries; one
man might be entitled to a certain proportion of room one year, and the
next year, by reason of representing a less quantity of coal, he might be
entitled to less room.
Q. Did you, last night, in the speech you made before the committee, re-
flect on the Workingmen's Benevolent association?
A. Only so far as I was pleased to call their ignorance of their own in-
terests; I reflected very severely upon them for endeavoring to accomplish
high wages by stopping the production of coal, because I said I thought it
was very detrimental to the coal trade.
Q. As you carry but little freight at $6 08 per ton from Port Carbon to
Philadelphia, and as you would carry less or more, if it was $20 00 a ton,
don't the increase of freight stop the transportation of coal?
A. I think not, for this reason: There is an association of the operators
called the Anthracite Board of Trade, which embraces almost the entire
coal mining regions, that are dependent upon our road for an outlet; that
association, with great unanimity, refused to accept the offer of the men,
and declared that they would not start their collieries; that left no collieries
that would ship except those outside of that organization, and these few
have been at work with these high tolls, and have shipped as much as they
could have done at a low rate.
Q. I find in the Governor's message this: "It appears that owing to a
large reduction in the wages of the miners, work was suspended by them
in January last. About the middle of the present month an arrangement
was effected under which the work was resumed." Is that correct?
A. No; not so far as the Schuylkill region is concerned, by any means;
I desire to state the particulars in which it is not correct.
<pb>
Q. Is it correct about the Northumberland region?
A. Not so far as the reduction of charges is concerned; but it is correct
so far as it relates to the Northumberland region, in regard to an arrange-
ment being made for resumption.
Q.'Was there any resumption?
A. There was, and they are still at work.
Q. Is it the fact about the Luzerne region?
A. I only know what I have been told by the companies themselves.
Q. Is it a fact as to the Columbia region?
A. It is not, so far as I know; that is only one small valley, with five or
six collieries; I embrace that when I speak of the Schuylkill region.
Q. Is it correct that " after a few days' labor the miners were informed
by the operators that the transportation companies had largely increased
their charges for freights—in some instances more than doubled them—in
consequence of which the mining was again suspended, and so continues."
A. What the operators may have said to the miners I know nothing
about; I know that there was no stoppage of mining in Schuylkill county,
because there had been no general resumption; I believe that some collieries
in the Northumberland district did stop, after having resumed; the most
of them are still working, and are sending their product to market by the
Shamokin road.
Q. Are they not sending a great deal by the Northern Central—the Sha-
mokin region?
A. Yes, sir; almost their entire products; they always sent a pretty
large proportion that way.
Q. Why is it that they now send it all that way?
A. Because they can get it to market that way cheaper than by our road,
at present.
Q. Can you tell me the proportion of their production they carried?
A. I suppose it was three-quarters of it.
Q. Is it not more?
A. I should think not, from the fact that we carried 50,000 tons, of
which 43,000 were anthracite, and a pretty good portion of that must have
come from the Shamokin region.
Q. Will you be kind enough to tell me whether, by the existing condi-
tion of things, the miners and laborers, and those dependent upon them,
are greatly injured?
A. Not at all, in my opinion; they could go to work to-morrow morning
if they want to, and get the same wages as when they stopped, and which
they agreed to take for 1871.
Q. You say that they could get the wages they agreed to take for 1871?
A. Yes, sir; that their officers agreed to take, acting for them.
Q. Do you mean that the association agreed f
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Please point out in this paper [referring to the agreement] where
this committee agreed to make that a basis for the men?
A. Two of this committee, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Siney, called upon me
with this paper, and said they had recommended it for adoption.
Q. Do you know that it was adopted 1
A. I was told it was.
Q. Please tell me whether the parties that constitute this Workingmen's
association told you so, and if so. when and where?
A. I was told by Mr. Siney.
Q. Was he the man who recommended it?
A. Yes, sir; he is the president of this association.
<pb>
Q. You don't dnow, instead of knowing?
A. That is the only knowledge I have.
By Mr. White—Q. I would like to hear Mr. Gowen's explanation of one
part of the Governor's message 1
A. The Governor states that a large reduction was made on the 15th
of January. There was no reduction made, or threatened to be made,
or designed to be made, or in any way attempted to be made, in the Schuyl-
kill, Mahanoy, Columbia, Shamokin or Lehigh districts, whatever; the re-
duction that was made had been made by the three companies in the Lu-
zerne region, and that had taken place on the first day of December pre-
ceding, and the strike in those regions was commenced on that day; the
men of,the Pennsylvania coal company, Delaware and Hudson canal com-
pany, and the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western railroad company, turned
out and refused to work on the first day of December, 1870; the men of
the Lehigh, Schuylkill, Mabanoy, Columbia and Shamokin regions did not
stop work until the 10th of January, 1871, and they stopped work without
any attempt having been made to reduce their wages in any way; so that
while the general idea that the strike originated in the reduction of wages
is true as applicable to the strike that occurred on the first of December,
in the upper Wyoming coal fields, it has no relation to the strike that took
place on the tenth of January in the remaining portion of the coal fields.
By Mr. Hall—Q. What the Governor states, then, is not correct?
A. Not as to those regions.
By Mr. White.—Q. Do you know what the reason was why they struck?
A. I have it only from what they say.
[Mr. Hall objected to that as not being evidence; the men are here.]
Asa Packer, being duly sworn, testified as follows:
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Be kind enough to state whether you are the president
of the Lehigh Valley railroad company?
A. I am, sir.
Q. How long have you been president of that company?
A. About three years; I can not say positively.
Q. Be pleased to state what the freights of your company were for coal
on the first of January, 1871, in any part of the Wyoming region, or on
the first of December last year?
A. I have no means of saying what they were; I don't recollect; they
vary all through the season.
Q. I ask you what they were on the 1st of December, 1870?
A. I don't remember.
Q. I ask you what they were on the 15th of December, 1870?
A. Four cents a ton per mile; I cannot say at what date.
Q. What are they now?
A. Four cents a ton per mile.
Q. When were they put up?
A. I cannot say now; some time in January; I don't remember the
date; I can get that evidence.
Q. As near as you can tell, how much were they increased—were they
doubled?
A. I think they were; on some parts of the road they were not; I shall
have to have the schedule of prices in order to answer correctly.
Q. The rates now charged on your railroad are four cents a ton per
mile—what are you allowed to charge on your railroad?
A. We are allowed to charge considerably more than that.
Q. There is no limit?
<pb>
A. No more than what is in all the charters; I don't remember the word-
ing of it; the charter will speak for itself; I never charged my mind with
it.
Q. What is the length of your road?
A. From Easton to Wilkesbarre is 101 or 102 miles.
Q. Don't you run to Pittston?
A. Not the Lehigh Valley; that is on the'Pennsylvania and New York
railroad.
Q. Under the same management?
A. No; Mr. Sayre is the president. . .
Q. Operated by the Lehigh Valley 1 N
A. Yes, sir.
1 Q. When was the Lehigh Valley company incorporated?
A. That I am unable to say.
Q. Since 1849?
A. No, sir; before.
Q. Since 1838?
A. Since 1838,1 think.
Q. Do you charge any more than the rates you have given for any part
of the road, for coal?
A. Not that I know of.
Q. Do you ship as much as you did before the increase?
A. Yes, sir, more; after the 10th of January it fell off; it has increased
since.
Q. Have you in contemplation to increase further?
A. No, sir.
Q. You stop at the Merchants' hotel when in Philadelphia?
A. No, sir; I stop at the Continental.
Q. Have you been at the Merchants lately?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you state, at either the Continental or Merchants, or at any other
place in Philadelphia lately, that your object was to stop off the small opera'
tors in coal?
A. No, sir.
Q. Why didn't you put up the rates before the suspension?
A. The reason was, we thought we would be able to get sufficient quanti-
ties to keep us alive.
Q. Had you living rates before?
A. It was less than it should have been.
Q. How much has the value of your stock increased since you put up the
rates 1
A. I don't know; there has been very little change.
Q. Was it not above par before, and is it not above par now?
A. Yes, sir. .
Q. What is it selling for, and what did it sell for?
A. 60, I think; par, 50.
Q. That was the case both before and since you put up the rates?
A. I don't think there has been any material change since.
Q. Didn't you raise the freights after the men had resumed work, on your
railroad?
A. No, sir.
Q. You are sure?
A. I am sure; at least I think I am.
Q. Give me the exact date you raised?
<pb>
A. I cannot; I can get that evidence and give it to the committee; I
have not the data by which I can speak.
Q. You say you did not raise after they resumed; didn't you raise after
they decided to resume, and you were informed of the fact?
A. I don't know what time they resumed. *-
Q. Were you not informed of the fact that they intended to resume;
didn't you raise afterwards?
A. I am unable to say what the date was; I am not aware that it was
before or afterward.
Q. What was the price per ton for coal from Wilkesbarre to Elizabeth-
port before the raise of freight by your company?
A. That I cannot say.
Q. Do you know what it is now?
A. I do not.
Q. Have you any officer of your road that can give this information '<
A. Yes, sir; we have printed bills.
Q. Of what it was before and after?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You don't know anything more about your road than that you be-
lieve that your rates have been doubled by this increase?
A. Yes, sir; I think they have; that is, on some parts of the road, not
on all.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. Before you raised your tolls, had you ever been told
that the operators in your region intended to resume work?
A. No, sir; they had declined to do so.
By Mr. Hall—Q. You did not understand me to ask you about the opera-
tors?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you know whether all the operators in the Lehigh region, or sonit
of them, intended not to resume?
A. All that I did know did not intend to resume.
Q. Who were they?
A. I don't know that I can name them.
Q Is your son-in-law one of them?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What is his name?
A. G. B. Linderman.
Q. Who is the other one
A. C. 0. Skeer.
Q. You say, so far as you know, that the operators did not intend to
resume; I desire the name of every operator who told you that he did not''.
A. I can only say that none of them did resume.
Q. Tell me, so far as you can, those that told you they would not; did
they consist of your two sons-in-law?
A. I don't know that I heard them say anything about it.
Q. Then Mr. Linderman never told you that he would not'!
A. No, sir.
Q. Did the other son-in-law ever tell you'!
A. No, sir; I don't remember having any conversation with them about
it.
Q. Please tell me the names of those that did tell you, as far as you can?
A. I heard Mr. Pardee, Mr. Markel, Mr. Sharpe; those are the only ones
that I can recollect distinctly; they all belonged to what was called the
Operators' association; the operators from our region have an association
in which they fix the prices every month; they heard from the members of
<pb>
so
that association what was the action of that association; that is the way I
got my knowledge.
Q. Linderman and Skeer are in partnership?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you know the fact that they made a written agreement with their
men?
A. I do not.
Q. Did they tell you so?
A. No, sir.
Q. Was William Carr their agent on the 1st of November, 1869?
A. I don't know what his position there is.
By Mr. Olmsted.—Q. Was it not your purpose, or one purpose you had
in view, in raising your transportation, to strengthen the hands of the opera-
tors, as against the workmen?
A. Well, sir, we did it more to strengthen ourselves than the operators.
Q. I want to know whether you had not that in view; was not that one
of the purposes?
A. No, sir; as far as our action went it was wholly in reference to our-
selves; we felt the importance of the operators getting to work upon a
basis which would give permanency to their business and ours; but our
action was entirely independent of the operators; it was with a view to
our own business.
By Mr. Petriken.—Q. Did you raise the price with the intention of driv-
ing the Benevolent association to terms?
A. No, sir; we did not expect to drive any body; we only took action
for ourselves.
By Mr. Hall —Q. Had you any arrangement with the president of the
Reading railroad 1
A. No, sir.
Q. H ad you any knowledge of what he was going to do, and he any know-
ledge of what you was going to do?
A. We had knowlege of what he was going to do, and in arranging our
tolls we did as we have done for years, before Mr. Gowen was president;
we always tried to arrange them about as near as what they have done
after they have.
Q. Did you know what he was going to do, and did he know what you
was going to do before both of you raised the toll'?
A. I knew what he was going to do before we raised ours. I think I
said, in his presence and in presence of others, that we should raise if he
did; there was no bargain between us.
Q. Your olject in raising the tolls was not in the interest or knowledge
of the operators?
A. I think they probably knew it; it was no arrangement.
Q. Did the operators meet with you in New York?
A. There was some of them there.
Q. They met with you and consulted about what was to be done t
A. Yes, sir; we had several different meetings there.
Q. All before you raised the tolls?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Didn't you do this for the purpose of making the workmen come into
your terms?
A. The reason of our doing it, was we felt that we could not go to work
until we had a guarantee that we could continue at work.
Q. That they would never charge more than you choose to pay?
A. No, Bir.
<pb>
Q. What then? \
A. Well we believed that the prices were higher than the operators could
continue to pay, and thereby we should be stopped when they were stopped;
we cannot work without them.
Q. Then was it not in the interest of the operators?
A. Not by any agreement.
Q. Was it not in their interest?
A. Well I think it was, not only in the interest of the operators but the
consumers.
Q. Do you expect to bring the miners and workingmen to terms?
A. I have no idea about that.
By Mr. White Q. You are the president of the Lehigh Valley road?
A. Yes. sir. .
Q. Previous to the increase of your tolls, was there a consultation be-
tween the officials of the Reading, Delaware, Lackawanna and Western,
the Lehigh and Susquehanna and the Delaware and Hudson canal compa-
nies?
A. Yes, sir; there were several.
Q. Was the advance by your company made as the result of those con-
sultations?
A. It was not made by any arrangement; when the others raised we
raised in the same proportion, as we always do; our prices are graded by
the othe s; we do not reach tide-water ourselves, and our rates are fixed
by the roads we connect with.
Q. Was the raise of the tolls on your road the consequence of the con-
sultation with the different railroad officials I have indicated?
A. I don't think it was; I think the prices were fixed by all the others;
I think we had arranged to raise ours previously; the arrangement was
made some time before it was done, so as to give notice to the shippers.
Q. Was it the purpose of this consultation to advance the rates on all
the roads I have indicated?
A. It was not called for that purpose.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Was it called for any purpose?
A. I was called to consult as to what it was best to do, and the state of
the market; it is a common thing for the parties interested to meet and
consult as to the prices, and what the prospects are.
By Mr. White Q. Was the advance of rates of the different roads the
subject of consultation at the meeting of those representatives of the differ-
ent roads?
A. I think it was; I could not say what was said.
Q. What was the reason for the advance of freights?
A. The reason for the advance, so far as we are concerned, was that we
oould not afford to start our work for the small quantity we should be get-
ting, and subject to be stopped again, whenever the market did not suit the
price that these operators or miners had fixed to go to work for; our com-
pany wan satisfied that Uiu price fixed was such that our section of coun-
try could not keep going; therefore, we said, until there was a better pros-
pect, it was not worth while to start.
Q. Was it agreed at this meeting that the freights on all these roads
should be advanced?
A. It was understood so; but there was no agreement.
Q. Was it not the purpose of the advance of freights to disband, if pos-
sible, the W. B. A.?
A. Mo sir, it was not; so far as my knowledge goes, it was for the pur-
<pb>
pose of working in harmony with them, if possible, and arrange a basis upon
which we could work in harmony with them.
By Mr. Hall Q. How do you propose to work in harmony with them?
A. Whenever they will go on.
Q. And you get all the money and they do all the work?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you propose to get into harmony with them by giving them less
money than was paid them before you made this raise on freights, under
the contract with your sons-in-law?
A. We propose giving them the rate, or we propose making our action,
as far as we are able to do it, to put the coal in market at as reasonable
price as it can be, and pay all hands a reasonable profit.
Q. Can that be done by charging four cents a ton per mile on your road?
A. We supposed this state of affairs would not last long, and we hoped
to get on more harmoniously than we did get along.
Q. Do you expect to reduce?
A. We hope to.
Q. Will you carry coal for operators now that will resume work at less
than your present rates?
A. So far as I am concerned I shall advocate the carrying of coal at as
low a rate, and start whenever we think that prices shall be such that we
can continue steadily to supply the market.
Q. If the operators resume work, will you carry coal for such of them as
do resume, at less than the present prices?
A. That is not a question that has come up; when it comes up we will
act upon it; I am only an officer of the company; those matters are always
arranged by a consultation with our company; there is no such arrange-
ment now; I presume there will be whenever the operators are ready to go
to work—enough of them to justify us.
Q. Then it is without reference to the miners?
A. No, sir; the company cannot get the coal to carry unless the miners
work, and for the small amount that has been carried it is better for us to
lie idle.
Q. And thus make the miners go to work?
A. We should hope to, and thereby give regularity to the trade?
Q. Do you connect with the New Jersey Central?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have they increased their rates?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. In what proportion t
A. I don't know.
Q. What will it cost to get a ton of coal from Wilkesbarre to New York?
A. I cannot- give the figures; Mr. Sayre can give them. We are very
anxious to have the men go to work.
Franklin B. Gowen re-called:
By Mr. White.—State if you were present at those meetings in New
York?
A. I was present at all of them; there were three iu New York and
one in Philadelphia; at the first meeting in New York there were present
representatives of the Lehigh Yalley, Lehigh coal and navigation com-
pany, the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western railroad company, the
Delaware and Hudson canal company, the Pennsylvania coal company,
and the Philadelphia and Heading railroad company, and there was also
present a representative of the Schuylkill county coal operators; nothing
<pb>
$3
.was done at that meeting in any way; no organization was effected, and
no chairman called; we simply talked over this question of what would
have to be done in order to bring about a settlement of this vexed labor
question—whether it was better to offer the men stated wages throughout
the year, or to offer them a basis. We agreed, without coming to any
conclusion, that it was not right for us, being principally railroad men, to
go into that question unless there were representatives of the coal miners
present. We adjourned to meet at a future day, I think in the next week;
on that occasion there were present, in addition to those I have named,
delegates representing the Lehigh coal operators, and also one representing
the lower or individual operators of the Wyoming coal field. It was on that
occasion, and merely incidental to the meeting, that I stated that unless the
operators all went to work in our region, we intended to put up the rates
for carrying coal. The business transacted at that meeting was to appoint
a committee, consisting of one representative of the railroad companies
and one representative of the coal miners from each of the three great re-
gions, (and I was added to that committee,) whose duty it was to report to
a general meeting what would be a fair and equitable rate of wages in the
three regions; for the difficulty which had always existed, and always
baffled the coal mining question, was that one region was paying a different
rate from another at the same time, and it lead to dissatisfaction among
the men; this committee was ordered to report such a rate of wages as,
when one region was getting a particular sum, the others ougtt to pay, to
make them equal; that required investigation as to the cost of producing
coal, and the relative price which a ton of coal produced to the different
operators at the breaker; that was obtained, and a rate was reported—a
given rate simply to be used as a basis for any future arrangement, in order
to find out what proportion and what manner of pay would make the men
of one region get the same as in another; there was no attempt or design
to interfere with the association of the workingmen; it was understood
that each region should settle with its workmen as they thought best, and
if they wanted to pay the basis they could pay it, and if they wanted to
pay a certain sum they could do that; there was to be no combination to
force upon a particular region a rate of wages different from another; that
was clearly understood; having got that far, it was necessary to ascertain
the cost of carrying to market, and what particular sum the operator
would receive at his breaker; that was accomplished; we met again in New
York, when we had representatives of the iron trade present; the iron
manufacturers of the Lehigh region and the Schuylkill valley sent two
delegates each, and on that occasion this same committee was continued,
in order to report this rate of wages; we did not agree upon it at that
time, and adjourned to meet in Philadelphia in a week. In the meantime
our charges had been raised; we met in Philadelphia, and we agreed that
the rate of wages announced at that meeting would enable the men to re-
ceive the same amount in the different regions. It seemed to be understood
that Schuylkill county should fix the rate of wages, and whatever she fixed
the other regions should endeavor to pay exactly the same, so that there
should be no feeling that the men of one region were getting more money
at one time than the men of another. We announced that offer; Schuylkill
had previously made an offer; we increased that offer; the operators had
offered a basis at $2 50, which required a reduction of twenty per cent.
below what they had got the year before, when coal sold at $3 00; and then
they agreed that it should advance in the same proportion as the year be-
fore. We insisted that if the men desired to share in the profits of the
business, and have their wages raised when coal raised, their wages should
<pb>
also fall when the price of coal fell; the Lehigh operators then fixed upon
a rate which would give to that region about the same rate; and as the men
of the three companies had offered not a basis but a fixed sum, it was un-
derstood that those three companies should offer to their men, or pay about
such a rate of wages as the other men were getting.
This was the entire object of these meetings. It was to bring about
harmony of action and invite co-operation from the men, and endeavor to
get up a system of harmony and co-operation, so that these strikes should
not occur. Above all it was agreed that we would endeavor to break down
the system that had existed by which one region had endeavored to keep
the other idle, and thereby profit by the increased price. We thought the
coal trade ought not to be a speculation, but a legitimate business, and we
knew it could not be so unless about the same rate was paid everywhere.
This was our object. I told the men that from the repeated interviews I
had had with Mr. Siney, I believed that, by sending for him, we could get
him to invite delegates from Lehigh and Wyoming to meet a few of us and
settle this question; they agreed that I should do so. I sent for Mr. Siney,
and he came to see me. I then asked him whether, if I could get the ope-
rators of the Wyoming and Lehigh regions to meet me, he would not come
as the representative of Schuylkill, and get one or two delegates from the
other regions, and let us meet, with a view of settling this controversy.
He thought it over a while, and said if it could be done he would not like
to come, but would try to send some one. It was on this occasion that the
offer was made, and he said he believed it was fair and right, and if it was
not accepted he would resign his position and go back to work. It was the
design of this meeting to bring about a fair rate of wages, that would be
the same in all the regions, so that these repeated strikes should not occur.
It was to prevent what had occurred before—some excitement keeping out
one region, and running up the price in another region, which would be
getting the benefit of it. It was to reduce this coal trade if possible to a
certain regular business, and the way to do it was to invite the co-operation
of the Workingmen's association, and get them to agree that some umpire
should be appointed to settle the differences betwen them. That is all we
did at the meetings; there was nothing done except this; it took several
hours to arrange the particular rates of wages and the manner of paying
them.
[Mr. Hall asked the committee to strike out that part of witness's testi-
mony in relation to what Mr. Siney had said; Mr. Siney was here and could
testify.]
By Mr. Hall Q. Will you please tell me where it was that Mr. Siney
said this to you and when it was?
A. It was in my house, in Pine street, Philadelphia, on a Friday evening,
either two or three weeks ago to-morrow—two weeks ago at least, possibly
three.
Q. Was it the Friday evening previous to your meeting in Philadelphia!
A. Yes, sir, it was.
Q. Was there any body else present?
A. No, sir; it was the Friday after our meeting in New York—the Fri-
day immediately preceding the day on which Mr. Siney and the committee
was to meet, at Pottsville, the committee of the operators. I had a dis-
patch, saying he was afraid he could not come that day, because he had to
be at Pottsville.
Q. I understand that yon and the other railroad officials met the opera-
tors in Philadelphia for the purpose of bringing about an equitable and
<pb>
fair rate of wages; I understand that you fixed a rate of wages for people
who were not represented when you made that arrangement?
A. One that should be fair to them; we took their offer.
Q. You constituted yourselves the judges of what they were to get?
A. We constituted ourselves the judges of what we thought the business
ought to pay.
Q. You offered them 10 per cent. less in the Lehigh region than they had
been paid up to that time—is that what you say is fair for them to get?
A. Of course; I don't pay much attention to the Lehigh men; they fixed
the price after knowing what the Schuylkill rate was. I think when coal
sold for $5 00 per ton, the men in the Lehigh region were to get about 10
per cent. less than the year before, when it sold for $5 00.
Q. This meeting was held in Philadelphia, at which Hon. Asa Packer
was president, and you were sent as the representative of the Reading rail-
road?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Other companies were represented, to wit: President Sloaa, of the
Delaware, Lackawanna and Western; Mr. Dickson, of the Delaware and
Hudson canal company; the president and treasurer of the Pennsylvania
coal company; B. W. Clark, president of the Lehigh coal and navigation
company; Charles Parrish, William Kendrick and Mr. Seigfried; was any
one else there?
A. Yes, sir; Mr. Pardee, Mr. Coxe, Mr. Linderman, Samuel Thomas,
H. S. Eckert, Henry Bushong and Mr. Borda, and some others.
Q. Who represented the Wyoming operators?
A. Mr. Parrish.
Q. Was there any body there representing these 75,000 men, composed
of the Workingmen's association, whose wages were to be touched by this
wand?
A. No, sir; we proposed to invite a conference with them afterwards.
Q. You proposed with Mr. Siney to invite a conference with the men
after you had told them what you would give them?
A, Yes, sir.
Q. What was the object of the conference?
A. To see if they would receive it.
Q. You say this committee was appointed to fix a fair rate of wages—
that all wages were to be alike?
A. As near as possible.
Q. Don't it require a great deal more trouble to mine coal in one region
than in others?
A. There is no difference in the regions; there is great difference in veins;
contract work has one hundred different prices; the only way we fixed what
the rate of contract wages should be in any particular region, was by re-
ference to what it had been established at; in Schuylkill different veins
were worked, and some portions of those veins were hard, and took a great
deal of trouble; when we fixed the rate of contract work in Philadelphia
we fixed it at exactly the' same rate that each particular colliery had given
during the last year, at the same rate of coal.
Q. Every colliery made their contracts with their men, and not with men
meeting in Philadelphia?
A. No, but they had that rate established, and it was known and recog-
nized.
Q. You intended to fix the rate of wages without consulting the men?
A. We intended to fix the offer we would make them.
Q. To be followed as it has?
<pb>
A. No; the rates of toll had been raised before this offer was made.
Q. The threat preceded the offer?
A. The rates of toll had been raised about the middle of February; this
meeting, I suppose, did not take place until a week afterwards.
Q. Is there not such a thing as fire-damp at mines?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Would you pay the men any more for those?
A. We always paid them more; they work on contract. In the Wyom-
ing region, where the laborer goes into the breast with the miner, he runs
the risk; there are not many that do that.
Q. Those few that do you would compel to work for the same?
A. Not at all; in all collieries there is a different rate of wages.
Q. You say the rates would fall with the price of coal?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Suppose the price of coal got down so low that they could not live?
A. There was a minimum, that they should never be paid a rate of wages
less than they are entitled to when coal sold for $2 00; their minimum
last year, in the Lehigh district, was $5 00 at Elizabethport.
Q. Did not these operators create the suspension that took place in the
winter by reducing it lower than the $5 00?
A. No, sir, because the suspension had taken place before we had any
meetings.
Q. Didn't they notify these men that they could not pay that much?
A. I don't know; I have no doubt that is true; my knowledge of min-
ing leads me to suppose that, although they could pay that when Schuylkill
was idle, they could not by any means afford to pay that when all the re -
gions were at work.
Q. Could these men live, with large families, at those rates?
A. Yes, sir; I think any good miner, in Schuylkill county, at the rate of
wages that has been offered to them, can earn from $3 50 to $4 So per
day without any trouble.
Q. And you conceive that it is right for you to meet in Philadelphia, with
a company of operators, and fix a price for them, or else let them quit
work?
A. They had quit work before we met; I think, and always thought, that
an employer has some right to say what wages he will give.
Q. Has he all the right?
A. He has the right to say what he can afford to pay, and that right, I
think, in all countries, has been conceded to a man whose capital is invested
in business.
Q. Has he the right, then, if he fixes the rate of wages for the men him-
self, and they refuse to take what you say you offer, and quit work, to say
that they caused the suspension?
A. You state a fact that has not occurred, because the suspension had
been ordered and had commenced long before this arrangement was talked
about.
Q. You stated just now that you believed that these men did quit because
the Schuylkill region had quit, and Linderman could not pay them the price
agreed?
A. I never said anything of the kind.
Q. Was not the price that Dr. Linderman was to give these men in the
Lehigh region the minimum price fixed prior to the time of the suspension
in the Lehigh region?
A. I don't know anything about the Lehigh region except what I have
heard; I believe the minimum in the Lehigh region, in 1869, was $5 a ton
<pb>
at Blizabethport; I know nothing at all what Dr. Linderman or any other
man asked them to take. "When they made the offer of ten per cent. less
than that it was after the suspension had commenced.
Q. Do you not know that after the suspension in the Schuylkill region
Dr. Linderman said to the men that they could not give them the minimum
price?
A. I don't know anything of the kind.
Q. Didn't you say you thought it was highly probable that was the case?
A. I said that from my knowledge I thought they could not afford to pay
that when all the regions were at work; at the $5 basis the Lehigh men
made from $4 50 to $5 per day, and if ten per cent. were taken off it would
give them from $4 to $4 50.
Q. You say you do not know anything more about these things; you
did not hear them as common rumor throughout the coal regions at the
time?
A. I never heard anything of that kind until one of the witnesses said
so last night.
Q. When they met in Philadelphia what did they tell you they had done?
A. Nothing upon that subject.
Q. Why did you fix the price for operators in the Wyoming region who
had agreed to give more?
A. We did not fix any price for operators in the Wyoming region at all;
we left it to those companies to meet and deal with their men.
Q. In fixing the price for the three companies, you do not consider that
a play upon words to say that you did not fix the price for the three re-
gions?
A. No, I do not.
Q. You fixed the price for every company in the three regions?
A. No, sir; the Wyoming coal field has, at the upper end, three. large
companies engaged in mining and carrying their own coal; the wages of
the men working for those companies were referred to the companies to set-
tle with the men, with the understanding that they should be, as near as
possible, what was paid in the other region; but in the other part of the
field there are a number of individual operators engaged in mining, who
mine nearly 2,000,000 of tons per annum; we did not fix any particular
rate for them, but it was presumed they would get the same as the Lehigh
region. .
Q. What was the reason you fixed the rates at the lowest figure, and that
after four months' suspension?
A. We did not fix them, because the men were to be paid according to
the price at which coal was selling, with the proviso that the men were not
to get above $3 in our region until all the regions went to work.
Q. What is the reason you fixed the basis upon the lowest rate of the
anthracite coal region?
A. We did not fix it on the lowest rate at all; we fixed the basis, to start
with, at $2 50; in the November before the men had been paid $2 25, but
if coal had sold at $3 in March they were to get paid at the $3 rate, and if
it sold at $5 they were to be paid at the $5 rate, if all the regions were at
work.
Q. Don't you know that the Schuylkill men were absolutely forced to ac-
cept the Gowen compromise for fear of starvation?
A. No, sir; on the contrary, there was no fear of starvation. I was in-
vited by Mr. Siney to go to Pottsville in the month of July last to attend
the meeting of the delegates of their entire organization, with a view to
see if I could not agree with them upon some basis. I went to Pottsville;
<pb>
we talked the whole thing over; there was no starvation there; the men
told me they would stand out until they got their rights. The men treated
me well.
Q. Have they not always behaved well?
A. Always, except that they have very peculiar idea9 about the coal
trade; their idea.is to make it good by running the price up and stop people
from using coal. At that meeting I appeared before them; they had been
idle from the first of April; I told them that the year before they had been
getting the $3 00 basis as a minimum, which they could well afford, because
the other regions were on a strike; I told them that when all the other
regions were at work coal would not average more than $2 50; hence I said
"you must come down with the price of coal when it comes down, in the
same way you go up with it when it goes up;" they said that was fair.
They agreed with me that they would go to work at the $3 00 basis, sliding
down to $2 00, and going up as coal went up. They asked me whether, if
they would agree to that rate of wages, I would assist their association by
reducing the tolls. We had put them up to $2 50, I thiuk from Port
Carbon to Philadelphia. I agreed with the men that we would reduce our
tolls very low, and keep them low for one month, and they then said that
they would go to work at that rate; they handed the proposition to me in
writing; I took it to the operators, and they told me I had injured them
by agreeing to it, and wanted me to keep the tolls up; I said "no, we will
keep faith with the workingmen."
Q. Was the fourth resolve of your committe this: "Resolved, That any
region may go to work, upon the above terms being accepted by their men,
but that no region shall commence until the men of such region have ac-
cepted said terms?"
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You met me in Philadelphia with these railroad men, to fix the wages
of these workmen who were not there at all, and had no representation?
A. To fix the offer we made to them.
Q. And that no one of them could go to work unless they accepted your
offer?
A. No; the operators declared they would not go to work.
Q. A man who was simply interested as a railroad man fixed the posi-
tion of these men, and declared that they should not go work unless thej'
accepted his terms?
A. There was connected with us the Board of Trade, representing the
united operators; I always declined to act in these meetings unless I was
accompanied by the representatives of the operators. The advance was
made some time subsequent to this meeting.
Q. And that on a construction of the charter that tolls and freight are
not the same thing?
A. The construction of the charter had nothing to do with the meeting
in Philadelphia; we claim the right to charge what we now charge because
our charter permits us to do it.
Q. You charge it upon the ground that the tolls and freight are not the
same thing?
A. Yes, sir; because the courts have so decided it.
Q. You don't know of any decision the court has made recently which
looks strongly the other way.
A. No, Bir.
Adjourned until to-morrow morning at half past nine o'clock.
<pb>
Harbisburg, March 10, 1871.
The committee met at half past nine o'clock A. M., all the members being
present.
In order to allow the parties opportunity to procure witnesses, it was
agreed that the committee should adjourn.
Adjourned until Wednesday next at half past seven P. M.
Harrisbubo, March 15, 1871.
The committee met at half past seven P. M., all the members being pre-
sent.
Mr. Lamberton appeared on behalf of the transporting companies.
Mr. Brockway appeared as associate counsel with Mr. Hall.
Franklin B. Gowen re-called by Mr. Hall:
Q. When we adjourned the other day, it was suggested that you should
bring the freight tariffs of the Reading railroad; have you brought them?
A. Yes, sir; here are the coal tariffs of the main road for five years,
[producing tariffs;] these are the coal tariffs of the East Pennsylvania
road as long as we have had the road, and this is the Lebanon Valley
branch, and these are for the miscellaneous business—merchandize, <fcc,
[producing the different tariffs.]
[Offered in evidence.]
Q. The last one of the Philadelphia and Beading freight and tolls on
coal, is March 1, 1871?
A. Yes, sir; that is the one now in force.
Q. I understand the rate of freight for a ton of coal at present, from
Pine Grove to Richmond, is $6 20?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And from Port Carbon to Richmond, $6 08; from Mount Carmel to
Richmond, $6 07; from Schuylkill Haven to Richmond, $6 00.
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What is the distance from Pine Grove to Richmond?
A. About 104 miles, I think.
Q. And from Tamaqua to Richmond? •
A. 108 miles, I think.
Q. And from Port Carbon to Richmond?
A. 93 miles.
Q. And from Schuylkill Haven to Richmond?
A. 89 miles.
Q. Are not the rates for chestnut and pea coal higher from these points
than for other coals?
A. They are twenty-five cents higher unless the shipper signs a release
for leakage, which is most always done; the size is so small that the cargo
is likely to leak out; we require a release from that. leakage, or charge
twenty-five cents per ton more.
Q. It is your purpose, is it not, to reduce the rates back to what they
were as soon as the same amount of coal is transported over your road
that was transported before the first of January last?
A. As soon as there is a general resumption in the coal region we really
intend to make them lower than they were before, the moment the men go
to work.
<pb>
Q. Will you be pleased to tell me what the freight is now on any other
class of merchandize that you choose to name, except coal, from Port Car-
bon to Philadelphia?
A. There are six distinct classes of other merchandize; the first class
would be $6 80 for 2,000 lbs.
Q. What is there in that class?
A. 100 different articles; there are some articles, light goods, that pay
double these rates—looking glasses and fragile articles that are liable to be
broken; furniture is assumed to weigh a certain amount; the first class
would be $6 80; the second, $4 08; the third, $3 60, and the fourth, $2 80;
then class "A" is $1 94 per ton; that would embrace heavy articles, like
iron ore, limestone, &c.
Q. Has there been any change in iron ore since the 1st of January last?
A. No; there has been no change within a year for limestone carried
upon the main line or Lebanon Valley road.
Q. Any changes that have been made have been reductions?
A. Yes, sir, but not on the main line or Lebanon Valley; there was
another rate, which was called a joint freight rate, which was comprised of
articles that came over several different roads.
Q. I understand there has been no change iu this grade of $1 94 on the
main line?
A. No, sir.
Q. And that any change that has taken place on the branches has been
a reduction instead of an increase?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What is the rate charged for coal on the East Pennsylvania?
A. From Pine Grove to Allentown $2 94.
Q. What is that distance?
A. 82 miles.
Q. That would be at what rate?
A. $2 94 a ton of 2,240 lbs., with five per cent. thrown off for waste;
we carry five per cent. over-weight.
Q. Is that the rule on your road?
A. Yes, sir, on all our roads on anthracite coal.
Q. State to the committee where the majority of the stock of the Read-
ing railroad is owned?
A. I cannot tell that.
Q. As hear as you can?
A. Nobody has the majority of it—no one man or association.
Q. Is the majority of it held in Europe or America?
A. In America.
Q. How much more in America than in Europe'!
A. I don't know; more than a majority is held in America; it changes
owners sometimes to the extent of 10,000 or 20,000 shares a day.
Q. That is, Reading stock held in this country.
A. Yes, sir. • ,
Q. Do you charge the same rate for transportation and toll on your
branches that you do on your main line?
A. No; we carried coal on the branches at a cent and a half per ton per
mile; our present rates on the branches are three cents and a half per ton
per mile; I may say, though, that it has always cost us three cents; the
object of carrying it at a lower rate on the laterals is to make a greater
amount of country tributary to the main line.
Q. State any roads that you have bought or leased since 1833, which
you now operate?
<pb>
A. The Chester Valley railroad.
Q. What is the length of that?
A. About 22 or 23 miles; then there is the Northern Liberties and Penn
Township railroad in Philadelphia, about a mile and a half long; the Per-
kiomen railroad, which is being constructed and of which thirteen miles are
finished; it is intended to run from Perkiomen Station, on the main line, to
Emaus, on the East Pennsylvania railroad; then we are building a road
called the Pickering Valley railroad, from Phcenixville to a place called
the Eagle, about twelve miles—not yet in operation; then there is the Cole-
brookdale railroad, from Pottstown to Mount Pleasant; I think it is fifteen
or sixteen miles in length; the next would be the Lebanon Valley, which
lias been merged into and become a part of the Reading railroad.
Q. What was the exact time you got the Lebanon Valley?
A. It was before my connection with the company; I suppose about the
year 1855 to 1860.
Q. Is that all?
A. No, sir; there is the East Pennsylvania road, which is thirty-six miles
long, from Reading to Allentown; there is a little road called the West
Reading road, only a mile long; there is also a little road called the Port
Kennedy road, which runs into the limestone district, four or five miles
long; then there is the Little Schuylkill road, twenty-eight miles long; the
Allentown railroad, from Port Clinton to Allentown, only five miles in
operation; the Schuylkill and Susquehanna, fifty-four miles long, from Au-
burn to Rockport; the Mount Carbon road, with two branches, eight or
ten miles altogether; the Schuylkill Valley road, seventeen and one-half
miles, and an extension four miles further; the Mount Carbon and Port
Carbon road, about three miles; the Mill Creek road; the Mahanoy and
Shamokin road, which embraces five other roads, and most of the roads in
the second coal field, and I suppose would aggregate nearly two hundred
mile3; the Mine Hill and Schuylkill Haven railroad, about one hundred
and forty miles; the Pine Grove and Lebanon road; the Lorberry Creek
and the Good Spring railroad; I think those are all.
Q. You cannot, without time to reflect, give me the time that you got pos-
session or leased all of these roads?
A. No, sir.
Q. Can you do it and make it a part of your testimony, by paper?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Will you do so t
A. Certainly; they have all, or nearly all, been acquired within ten or
fifteen years; many of them have been built lately.
Q. Do you charge the same on the Lebanon Valley road as you do on
the main line on coal?
A. No, sir.
Q. Can you give the charge for coal on the Lebanon Valley'!
A. From Tamaqua to Harrisburg it is $1 72.
Q. The whole of that would not be on the Lebanon Valley?
A. That is pro-rated; on the coal that goes from the main line to the
Lebanon Valley we charge the same rate per ton per mile on both roads,
after taking out of the gross rate a sum of money for the main line, which
is equivalent to the loss on the laterals.
Q. Is there no coal going from the Lebanon Valley to the main line?
A. Yes, sir..
Q. On coal shipped from any point on the Lebanon Valley road, what is
the rate per mile at present?
A. The only coal of that kind we get is from the Summit Branch com-
<pb>
panv, which we carry from Dauphin to Philadelphia, for which I think we
get $2 20.
Q. What would be the distance from Dauphin to Philadelphia?
A. 120 miles.
Q. How much would the Lebanon Valley get?
A. We keep no separate accounts for the Lebanon Valley.
Q. Don't you have different officers t
A. Not at all; there is no Lebanon Valley railroad company in exist-
ence; it was merged into the Reading.
Q. Does that portion of your road get the same proportion of the $2 20
as the main line?
A. Yes, sir; out of that $2 20 we pay something to the Pennsylvania
road for the use of their track from Harrisburg to Rockville—about 8 or
10 cents.
Q. WThat are your rates for shipping ore and limestone on the Lebanon
Valley?
A. The same as on the main road; the same schedule that applies to the
main road applies to the Lebanon Valley road for every thing, except ar-
ticles that come to us over the Lebanon Valley that do not originate on
that road, that come from other roads.
Q. Do you appear here representing any other persons or corporations
than your own road?
A. I appear in answer to a subpoena, simply, of course, as representing
our own road; I do consider myself acting as counsel for other roads and
other people.
Q. Be pleased to give the names of those?
A. Until Mr. Lamberton relieved me, I acted on behalf of all that were
here at the last meeting, including the Anthracite Board of Trade and the
Reading railroad company.
Q. Do you act on behalf of all that represent the Anthracite Board of
Trade?
A. I acted for them; I have not seen the parties since.
Q. Have you been in consultation with them since you were here?
A. No, sir.
Q. Will you be pleased to name those corporations?
A. The Lehigh Valley and Lehigh navigation company, and Anthracite
Board of Trade, which embraces the operators in the Schuylkill region;
they were here.
Q. Do you represent the Delaware and Lackawanna railroad?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you know whether there is any representative of that road here'!
A. Their president is here—Samuel Sloan—and their general coal agent.
Mr. Storrs, is here, and General John Brisbin is here.
Q. You have not been in consultation with Mr. Sloan and these gentle-
men?
A. I came up with them to day.
Q. Not as counsel?
A. No, sir; I talked freely and fully with them.
Q. Is the policy adopted by all of you the same, with reference to rail-
road freights?
A. I cannot answer for anbody else on that subject; I have had no con-
sultation with the officers of the Delaware and Lackawanna about their
roads, nor the Delaware and Hudson.
Q. Does your company permit any coal to be sent over its roads at yonr
old or less rates than you now charge, and if so, by whom?
<pb>
A. None, whatever; not one pound; there is no coal carried in any way
on our roads except at these rates, other than the bituminous coal.
Q. Has there ever been or is there now in existence any understanding
between you and any of the operators or shippers of coal on your road,
by which they have or can receive any drawbacks on freight?
A. None, whatever, except the public drawbacks; there are now no
drawbacks except to the bituminous shippers, to certain ports; there are
times in the year when we publish a list of public drawbacks that we al-
low to anthracite shippers, depending upon ports to which it is consigned,
but that is public, and everybody gets it. .. .
Q. Does the Reading railroad company, either in its own name, or through
anybody else, as trustee or agent, hold coal lands?
A. The Reading railroad company owns no coal lands except a little
tract of a 100 acres, which they got under transactions with the Schuylkill
navigation company; the company owns a large amount of the stock of
the Delaware coal company, which owns about 1,000 acres of land; the
Reading company owns a majority of the stock of the Schuylkill and Sus-
quehanna company, which owns many thousands of acres of coal lands;
with that exception they own none. :.
Q. Did you purchase the Trevorton tract?
'A. Not for the Reading company; I have bought, lately, as counsel, a
large amount of lands, but that does not concern this matter; it was busi-
ness for private individuals.
Q. I desire to know whether these purchases that have been made lately
of large bodies of land are not indirectly for the Reading railroad com-
pany?
. A." They are not; because the Reading railroad company has no right, I
think, to hold those lands, and the lands have been paid for by private in-
dividuals. . .
Q. Is not your company interested in a bill now before the Legislature
to incorporate the Franklin coal company?
A. The people owning these lands are interested. .
Q. Are not they stockholders of the Reading railroad?
A. Some are, and some not.
Q. Are not the large mass of them? .'
A. Yes, most all; this is a matter in which I act for private individuals,
ttnd I claim that I have no right and ought not to speak of it; 1 appeared
in that transaction as counsel for private individuals who have furnished
the means wherew ith these lands have been bought, and tae title is in them,
or in me as their agent and attorney.
Q. Are the persons for whom you are agent, attorney or trustee not
stockholders in the Reading railroad company?
A. Some of them own stock; I think some do not. • •
Q. I would like to know how many do not?
A. I decline to answer any question that has no reference to the Read-
ing railro-d company, and seeks to make public a private tiansactiuii be-
tween myself and clients.
Q. Has your company any other bills now before the Legislature, or are
there any bills before them that you are interested in, as a^eut or trustee
for either the Reading railroad company or its stockholders, directly or
indirectly. under which they can mine coal.
- A* Jio, sir. ..:'
Q. Is the Reading railroad company interested in any coal operation*
in Pennsylvania, other than in transporting coal over its road?
A. Not in any manner except as transporters of coal; I mentioned the
<pb>
three tracts of land which they have an interest in by virtue of owning the
stock of the companies; there is no coal mined in any of them.
Q. Has there not been?
A. Not for fifteen years.
Q. I mean since you purchased?
A. I don't know when the company first acquired the stock of the Dela-
ware coal company, but twelve or fifteen years ago there was a colliery on
the Delaware company's lands; if the Reading company then owned the
stock, it of course, to a certain extent, participated in the rent resulting
from mining.
Q. Who purchased the Trevorton lands?
A. I purchased them myself for a gentleman in England; the Reading
railroad company has no connection with that.
Q. Are those gentlemen stockholders in your company?
A. I decline to answer any question in regard to clients of mine for
whom I transact business.
Q. Does the Reading road hold or have an interest, directly or indirectly,
in an estate called the Brock estate?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you know who does own that?
A. I do.
Q. Who?
A. It is owned by W. J. Newell; he lives in London.
Q. Is he a large stockholder in the Reading road?
A. I don't know that he is a stockholder at all, except as a partner in
another house; I decline to answer these questions. The Reading road is
not interested to the extent of one cent in mining coal; there are no lands
that I have bought on behalf of any body connected with that company
that are held or owned by more than three persons.
Q. If the Legislature should incorporate the Franklin coal company,
and the Franklin coal company should do a large and remunerative coal
business, would the stockholders of the Reading company, as stockholders,
derive a benefit from it?
A. That would depend entirely upon whether they had any interest in it
or not; I decline to answer any thing of that kind, for nothing of that kind
exists.
Asa Packer re-called by Mr. Hall:
Q. Have you got the freight tariffs that we desired?
A. Mr. Sayer, the superintendent, has those, and will produce them.
Q. I desire to know whether the Lehigh Valley railroad company has
not got a large tract of coal land in Luzerne county, and if so, how much
and where?
A. The Lehigh Valley railroad company have not, but they have bought
stock in companies that do own them.
Q. Do they control the stock in those companies that do own them; do
they own a majority of it?
A. I think they do.
Q. It is a large body, is it?
A. I suppose it to be so.
Q. Can you give us the number of acres?
A. Probably 1,500 or 2,000 acres.
Q. Has it been worked?
A. It has.
Q. And coal sent to market and sold?
<pb>
A. Yes, sir; but not on account of the Lehigh Valley railroad.
Q. Is the company interested in coal lands about Pleasant Valley?
A. The company are not.
Q. You own the majority of stock in a company that owns the lands
and works the mines?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Is there any other place that this state of affairs exists?
A. The company own lands in the Beaver Meadow and Hazleton region,
that they acquired by the merger of those two companies.
Q. How much?
A. I should say probably 4,000 or 5,000 acres.
Q. Has that been operated?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And shipped over your road?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Together with the other one?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have you got a system of drawbacks on your road?
A. Not that l am aware of.
Q. Would Mr. Sayre know?
A. I think he will; I don't think there is any.
Q. Have you not refused operators transportation to remove coal even
at your present prices within the last two months?
A. No, sir; not to^ny knowledge.
Q. Didn't you refuse William Taggart?
A. No, sir.
Q. Didn't the company?
A. Not that I know of.
Q. Do you say that you find the right to charge four cents a ton per mile
for coal in your charter?
A. Yes, sir; freight and tolls.
Q. Does not your charter expressly confine you to one and one-half cents
per ton per mile for toll and one and one-half cents per ton for transpoita-
tion?
A. Not that I am aware of.
Q. What are the rates of freight now charged by the Pennsylvania and
New York canal and railroad company?
A. Four cents a ton per mile, I think.
Q. When was your company incorporated?
A. Within four or five years, I think.
Q. Business has been largely stopped along the line of the Lehigh Val-
ley road?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Most of the furnaces have gone out?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And that is the case with all other business that uses anthracite coal?
A. Yes, sir; generally, not all.
Q. Can you give the committee an idea of the number of men thrown
c*ut of employment by these manufacturing establishments in the Lehigh
valley 1
A. I cannot.
Q. Can you give within 1,000 or 2,000, or even 5,000?
A. No, I cannot; I am not familiar with the business; I don't know how
many were thrown out; I should suppose there would be from 5,000 to 10,-
000.
5
<pb>
6e
Q. These establishments are lying idle now?
A. Some of them; most of them, I think, were idle before the raise took
place.
[The committee consented that the charters should be considered as evi-
Robert H. Sayre, sworn.
Examined by Mr. Hall Q. You are the superintendent of the Lehigh
Valley railroad?
A. Yes, sir; general superintendent.
. Q. Residing where?
A. Bethlehem.
Q. Your company controls the Lehigh and Susquehanna *
A. It is owned by the Lehigh coal and navigation company; I believe it
is leased to the Central.
Q. Your company controls the Pennsylvania and New York canal com-
pany?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. The rates are the same on both?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What are the rates?
A. Four cents a ton per mile.
Q. Wbat were they on the 1st of December last?
A. About one cent and six-tenths, I believe; it was a cent and a half on
the Pennsylvania and New York.
Q. And what on your road?
A. On the 1st of December it was a cent and fifty-six one-hundredths on
the Lehigh Valley.
Q. Have you the present schedule, and the schedule for some time past,
by which those two companies carried coal?
A. I have of the Lehigh Valley.
Q. Please give it to us?
A. Yes, sir; this is for the present.
[Paper produced.]
A. No, sir.
Q. How high was it ever before?
A. One dollar and fifty-five cents, I believe.
[Schedule of rates from 1856 to the present time offered in evidence,
marked "tariff Lehigh Valley railroad, exhibit A."]
Q. You have not got it for the New York and Pennsylvania?
A. No, sir; but it was a cent and a half.
Q. Since its incorporation?
A. No, sir; I think they started at two cents, and have gone gradually
down as coal fell.
Q. You did not go up until lately?
A. No, sir.
Q. And then you jumped up to four cents?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you operate the Sullivan and Erie railroad?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you furnish the rolling stock?
A. We are furnishing cars and locomotives.
Q. On contract?
A. No, sir.
dence.]
<pb>
6?
Q. Are you going to lease the road?
A. I don't know; probably We Will.
Q. Are you not negotiating for a lease?
A. No, sir; not at present.
Q. Does your company own large tracts of coal lands %
A. No, except the Hazleton lands; that we got by merger.
Q. How much?
A. About 1,800 acres, at Hazleton, Luzerne county.
Q. Is that worked now?
A. Not now.
Q. Most of the manufacturing establishments have stopped along the line
of your road, have they not?
A. Fully half of them.
Q. I mean those that use anthracite coal!
A. About half the furnaces, I think, are blown out.
Q. Is it not true that a number of them have got to using bituminous
coal t
A. Rolling mills have.
Q. Brought from Pfttsburg?
A. No, sir; they bring part of it from Towanda; another portion from
the Pennsylvania road; the rolling mills have always used a portion of
bituminous coal.
Q. Is Towanda coal bituminous?
A. Semi-bituminous.
Q. Do you bring some from Broad Top?
A. Yes, sir; we take that from the Reading road at Allentown.
Q. Can you tell how many men have been thrown out of employment in
the Lehigh valley by the stoppage of these establishments?
A. No, sir, I don't know that I can approximate it; I am a stockholder
in an iron company; nearly all the men are employed in repairing the
furnaces.
Q. You stated that the Pennsylvania and New York canal and railroad
company charge now the same that your company does—four cents a ton
per mile?
A. Yes, sir. t
David T. Bound, sworn.
Examined by Mr. Hall Q. Are you the general superintendent of the
'Lackawanna and Bloomsburg railroad?
A. I am superintendent.
Q. And reside where?
A. Kingston.
Q. What is the length of your road, and what does it connect with?
A. The length is 80 miles; it connects at the northern end with the
Delaware, Lackawanna and Western, at Scranton, and at the southern end
with the Philadelphia and Erie, at Northumberland.
Q. It fills up a gap of 80 miles?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How long have you been superintendent?
A. About two years.
Q. Where is the majority of the stock held?
A. I don't know.
Q. What officer could tell that?
A. I could not tell you.
Q. Who is president of your road?
<pb>
A. W. R. Storrs.
Q. I understand you to say that you do not know that the majority of
your stock is owned and held by the Delaware, Lackawanna and. Western
railroad?
A. I do not.
Q. Have you got the present tariff on your road?
A. Yes, sir.
[Witness produces tariff. Offered and marked ex. "B."]
Q. What is the distance from Pittston to Northumberland?
A. About 71 miles.
Q. What do you charge to carry a ton of coal that distance now?
A. $2 75.
Q. When did you increase?
A. Some time in February; I don't remember just the date.
Q. Give the date if you can?
A. [Looking at paper.] February 20.
Q. What had it been before?
A. $1 25, I believe; I am not positive.
Q. Were the rates raised relatively between other stations in the same
proportion per mile?
A. We never make rates per mile on that road; we make them cover all
the mines; our mines are short distances apart, and we make the same
rates to all parties from all points.
Q. I cannot understand what you mean?
A. We charge as much for carrying a ton of coal from Plymouth as
from Kingston.
Q. How far is Plymouth from Northumberland?
A. 60 miles.
Q. You charge as much for carrying coal that 60 miles as for 70?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You charge $2 75 for 60 miles?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What do you charge from Shickshinny to Northumberland?
A. The same price; that is about 55 miles.
Q. And you charge $2 75?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What do you charge from Shickshinny to Beach Haven on coal?
A. $2 00.
Q. How many miles?
A. It is about nine miles.
Q. You charge $2 GO for that?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What do you charge from Shickshinny to Berwick? •
A. $2 10.
Q. How many miles is that?
A. About 12 miles.
Q. How much from Shickshinny to Bloomsburg?
A. $2 20.
Q. How many miles?
A. About 24 or 25.
Q. What do you charge to carry coal from Shickshinny to Danville?
A. $2 50.
Q. How many miles is that?
A. About 35.
Q. What did you charge before this raise from Shickshinny to Danville'!
<pb>
A. $1 25.
Q. What did you charge from Shiekshinny to Northumberland before?
A. $1 25.
Q. What did you charge before the raise for carrying a ton of coal from
Pittston to Northumberland?
A. I believe it was $1 25.
Q. Now you charge more for carrying a ton of coal nine miles than you
did for carrying a ton of coal from Pittston to Northumberland before
the raise?
A. I don't know; I have not looked to see.
Q. Are you making these charges under your charter?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And you say your charter allows you to do this?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. When was 3'our company incorporated?
A. I don't know.
Q. Do you know that the Legislature of 1870 passed a law repealing
the supplement of 1856?
A. I do not, positively.
Q. Haven't you been receiving freights under this statute of 1870?
A. We are moving no freight to Bloornsburg, only by special agreement.
Q. What is that special agreement?
A. It is on limestone from Lime Ridge to Bloornsburg.
Q. What is that?
A. For hauling and delivering to the furnaces is 25 cents per ton.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. In whose cars is this coal carried?
A. Our own.
Q. Have you been carrying any coal in your cars at these high rates?
A. Yes, sir;
Q. How much?
A. Probably 400 tons a day.
Q. How many tons a day are you prepared to carry, with the equipment
of your road?
A. That would depend upon where we carried it to; if we carried it the
length of our road we could carry 3,000 tons a day. .'
Q. Then the stock with which you could carry 3,000 tons a day the whole
length of your road is idle, except so much as is used for carrying these
400 tons?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What is the difference between the expense to which the company is
subjected in carrying 3,000 tons and carrying 400 tons a day?
A. The difference would be the wear and tear of the track and machinery
to haul it; we keep the same number of men to repair our tracks, am?
agents, superintendent, &c.
Q. Then all the other expenses are kept up except these you have men-
tioned? \
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Are these high rates charged when individual shippers have their own
cars?
A. No, sir.
Q. Can you tell me what is the average of expense to which you arc
subjected when your road is fully employed?
A. About $65,000 to $70,000 monthly; that is for transportation expenses.
Q. To how much less than that are you now subjected in carrying these
400 tons a day?
<pb>
A. Very little; our expenses were nearly $60,000 for last month.
By Mr. Hall Q. What did I understand you to say the capacity of
your road is per day?
A. I think I told the gentleman that we were prepared to carry 3,000 tons.
Q. And your policy has been such as to reduce it down to 400?
A. No, sir; not our policy.
Q. Something has reduced it down to 400 since you raised your rates?
A. No, sir.
Q. Was it reduced before?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How long before?
A. Ever since the strike we have not averaged 500 tons a day, I don't
think.
Q. Who gets these 400 tons?
A. The furnace "men principally.
Q. Have they not stopped?
A. Some of them.
Q. If they have stopped will they need 400 tons, or 40, or 4?
A. I could not tell you what they will need; we are moving about 400
or 500 tons a day to the furnaces and local business generally.
Q. You propose, under your present system of management, to make
the 400 tons pay you as much as the 3,000 tons would have paid you be-
fore?
A. I don't know that we propose that.
Q. Don't you do it?
A. No, sir.
Q. What do you charge per ton for limestone from Lime Ridge to
Bloomsburg?
A. From Upper Lime Ridge to Bloomsburg twenty-five cents—six miles;
that is in our own cars.
Q. You have a right to do that under your chaiter?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Don't you know that your charter expressly confines you to twenty
cents?
A. No, sir.
Q. What do you charge for Lake Superior iron ore from Northumber-
land to Danville?
A. I believe the rate is forty-five cents.
Q. How many miles?
A. Twelve miles, I think.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. What does this charge on limestone include?
A. It includes delivering it at the furnace, after it leaves our track; we
run it up after it leaves our main track, and switch it for them.
Q. After it leaves your main track you push it over a private road?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many pounds to the ton?
A. 2,240; we charge for the .work we do over the switch, from the main
line to the furnace.
By Mr. Hall Q. Does your charter allow you to do that?
A. I don't know any thing about that.
Q. You are charging without knowing anything about the law?
A. I presume we have a right to do it.
William Fox, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as follows:
Q. What is your business, and where do you reside t
<pb>
A. I reside near Danville; I have been interested in a small rolling mill.
Q. Is it running?
A. No, sir.
Q. When did it stop?
A. On the first day of this month, I think.
Q. Did it stop on account of the high rates of freight on coal?
A. Partly that, and partly because we had a large stock of iron on hand
and there did not seem to be much sale.
Q. Has not iron decreased in price?
A. I don't know that it has; I have heard said so.
Q. What were the freights you were paying for coal prior to the raise?
A. $1 25.
Q. What have they been since?
A. We have not paid any freights on the advanced rate3; I think it is
$2 50.
Q. Why don't you pay freights on the advanced rate?
A. I don't think it would pay to give the advanced rates, not having a
sale for the iron, and having a pretty large stock of iron on hand at the
time.
Q. Did you desire the men to take less wages?
A. I did.
Q. Didn't you say that if they would deduct 12£ per cent. j'ou would
pay the freight and continue running the mill?
A. I did.
Q. How many men have been thrown out of employment?
A. I think we employed between sixty and seventy.
Q. Are they idle?
A. I am not able to tell you; several have gone to other mills.
Q. Do many of them have families?
A. I am not able to tell; I know a number have families; a good many
were strangers to me.
Thomas Beaver, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Examined by Mr. Hall Q. Be kind enough to state where you reside
and what is your business? »
A. I reside in Danville, and manufacture railroad iron.
Q. Have you a rolling mill there?
A. Yes, sir; and four furnaces.
Q. How many men have you been employing?
A. From 1,000 to 1,200.
Q. Have you stopped all these furnaces and this mill?
A. The furnaces were stopped; the rolling mill is at work at present;
we suspended the rolling mill on the 25thj of January and resumed on
Tuesday of last week.
Q. Did your men strike?
A. No, sir. .
Q. Did you stop the furnaces on account of the scarcity of coal?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many men are idle on account of stopping those four furnaces?
A. About 170. ....
Q. Many of them have families?
A. Yes, sir; it was not in consequence of the advance in freights on
coal that we stopped our furnaces; it was the high cost of mining coal;
the price they asked at one of our principal pollieries, and the refusal to
<pb>
work, is the cause; we stopped our Pittston colliery about the 8th of
March; our men demanded a price which we thought entirely too high;
they demanded a price fixed upon a basis of $9 50 for coal at Elizabeth-
port, which we did not feel disposed to give; they sent us in a notice,
which I can give.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. Have you got that?
A. Yes, sir; we offered a basis of $6 50, which is 18| per cent. above
the price for October.
Objected to by Mr. Hall, as irrelevant; the question was whether the
companies had violated their charters.
Mr. Lamberton said he proposed to show what was the cause of the
suspension, and what was the reason that Mr. Beaver could not keep up
his furnaces.
Mr. Hall maintained that the committee was confined to the solitary in-
quiry as to whether the companies had violated their charters or not.
The objection was over-ruled.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. What was the cause of the stoppage?
A. It was in consequence of the high cost of coal and the large stock of
iron on hand.
Q. What caused the high cost of coal?
A. We were unable to induce our miners to accept what we considered
an equitable basis.
Q. Are you the proprietor of a colliery?
A. We are.
Q. Do you take out coal for your furnaces?
A. We do.
Q. Will you state whether there was a strike at that colliery?
A. There was a suspension; I presume you might call it a strike.
Q. When did that take place?
A. Since the first of March, at Pittston.
Q. What caused this high price of coal? ,
A. The high cost of mining; our miners at Pittston demanded a basis
of $9 50, which we declined to pay; we offered them the same price that
Mr. Parrish paid, which was $6 50; we regarded $9 50 as an imposition,-
and we declined paying it and they stopped.
Q. How much was this $9 50 above what was paid the year before?
A. I presume that the average of the year 1870 would probably be $6;
$9 50 would be an advance of 43| per cent. above the $6.
Q. I want you to produce any writing showing that demand—what they
required of you?
[Witness produces paper.]
Q. Who is D. Davis?
A. I understand the signatures to be the names of a committee of
miners at Pittston. ....
Q. That paper was presented by a committee of miners;?
A. Yes, sir; to our superintendent at Pittston, Mr. Davis.
Q. It was addressed to your superintendent?
A. Yes, sir; our mining boss.
Q. State whether this paper was received by your superintendent, and
whether Mr. Davis is your superintendent?
A. Mr. Davis is our local superintendent; this was handed to the sup sr-
intendent of our mines, Mr. Edwards.
Q. State whether you were informed of that demand, and whether it
was because of your refusal to comply with it that they suspended work at
your colliery?
<pb>
Objected to by Mr. Hall. Admitted.
A. The demand for this rate of wages was made to us through this com-
mittee; we proposed to pay $6 50, which they were entitled to according
to our understanding of the arrangement, that being the price paid by other
operators, all working under the same basis; we submitted that to our
men, and they refused to accept it.
Objected to by Mr. Hall. Admitted.
Q. State whether you know as a fact that this increased demand was
made upon you?
A. I do.
By Mr. Hall Q. Of your own personal knowledge?
A. I do not come in contact with the men; we have a general superin-
tendent.
Objected to by Mr. Hall; the superintendent could be a witness.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. Did you instruct your superintendent to refuse
to pay more than what was paid last year? .
Objected to by Mr. Hall as irrelevant. Admitted.
Q. Did you refuse to pay this, and so direct your agent?
A. We did, and the men quit mining in consequence of our refusal.
Q. How long have you been engaged in the iron business?
A. Thirteen years at Danville; some few years previously at other
points.
Q. You are a very large manufacturer?
A. Not very large; we produce about 25,000 tons of rails, and about
30,000 tons of pig iron.
By Mr. Hall Q. Did you not say to some of these very men, when
they made this demand for increased wages, that you would pay it if the
railroad would not increase their rates on coal?
A. No, sir; neither did we authorize our agent to say anything of the
kind.
Q. Didn't you say that to H. W. Evans?
A. No, sir.
Q. Nor to anybody else?
A, No, sir.
Q. What was you agreement with these miners?
A. We paid them sixty-nine and a-half cents a ton upon a basis of $5 00
upon.coal at Blizabethport, and an advance of twelve and a-half cents
above the sixty-nine and a-half cents for every dollar that coal sold for at
Elizabethport above $5 00; that was the agreement.
Q. What do you mean by the agreement ?.
A. That was the arrangement made with them.
Q. Had not they a right to raise their wages?
A. I suppose they have.
Q. Have they not a right to refuse to work?
A. Certainly; and we have a right to decline paying what they ask.
Q. You don't pretend to compel them to work if they do not choose to?
A. No, sir; we don't pretend to own them.
Q. They did simply what they had a right to do under the law?
A. They did it in violation of the agreement they made with the com-
mittee.
Q. Didn't you agree to pay one-eighth of the advance?
A. One-half of the advance on the sales of coal at Elizabethport.
Q. Are you a large stockholder in this railroad?
A. I don't own a dollar's worth.
<pb>
Q. The men had a right to make this demand, and you had a right to
efuse?
A. I do not conceive that they have a right to refuse, under the agree-
ment.
Q. Where is the agreement?
A. We have it at home.
Q. Didn't you say to a committee of laborers that you would pay the
laborers if you could get coal?
A. No, sir—not the $9 50 basis. They had been working for two years
at a basis fixed by Mr. Parrish.
William R. Storrs, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Examined by Mr. Hall Q. State whether you are connected with the
Delaware, Lackawanna and Western railroad?
A. Yes, sir. •
Q. In what capacity?
A. As general coal agent.
Q. Where does the road run from and to?
A. From Great Bend to the Delaware river.
Q. How many miles long?
A. My impression would be from 80 to 100 miles.
Q. Do they not own the road from Great Bend to Binghampton?
A. I cannot tell you.
Q. What are the rates of freight for carrying coal on your road now?
A. I could not tell you.
John Brisbin, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as follows:
Examined by Mr. Hall Q. What is your connection with the Delaware,
Lackawanna and Western railroad?
A. I am one of the managers, and also the general adviser.
Q. Where does the road run from and to?
A. The road proper runs from a point about three miles north of Great
Bend to the centre of the Delaware river, dividing the States of Pennsyl-
vania and New Jersey.
Q. How many miles long?
A. About 116 ; that is the Delaware and Lackawanna railroad proper.
Q. What roads do you own, and what roads have you leased?
A. We have leased the Warren railroad, extending from the Delaware
river to New Hampton junction; the Morris and Essex railroad, extending
from Phillipsburg to Hoboken, all together in the State of New Jersey.
Q. Do you own or lease any roads in Pennsylvania other than those you
have named?
A. No, sir.
Q. Have you merged any other roads with yours—the Delaware and
Cobb's Gap?
A. That is a part of the Delaware and Lackawanna road proper; we
leased a little road, about two miles long, known as Keyser Valley road.
Q. Where does that run from?
A. From a point on our main line, about two miles north of Scranton,
down to some colliery.
Q. What are the freights for coal per ton per mile on your road?
A. Previous to December 1st we had no coal rates; since that time, for
what we have transported short distances to way stations, we have charged
at the rate of four cents per ton per mile.
<pb>
Q. Have you got the freight taiiff?
A. There is none on coal.
Q. Do you charge what you please?
A. We charge what I said we charged.
Q. Is it an arbitrary charge that is fixed one day and taken off the next?
A. Previous to the 1st of December we had no coal tariff, because no-
body offered us any coal for transportation; after the suspension of work
two or three very small operators about Scranton wanted to send some coal
to way stations; we had no offer to send coal to New York; this that was
offered for way stations we took for four cents per mile; there was no
writing, only the offer to take it at that rate.
Q. Was this done by an arrangement with any other road?
A. No. sir.
Q. When did this take place—this four cents per mile?
A. I cannot tell the date; it was whenever these parties wanted to ship.
Q. Had there been a meeting, at which your road was represented, with
other roads prior to that time?
A. No, sir; that rate was fixed before there was any meeting.
Q. Has the rate been changed since?
A. No, sir.
Q. You understand that your charter allows you to charge one and one-
half cents per ton per mile?
A. Our charter allows us to charge for transportation in our own cars
just what we choose; there is no limit.
Q. Then you contend that the limit in your charter is confined to tolls?
A. The limit in our charter, so far as relates to the price we may charge,
refers to what we transport in cars of other parties.
Q. That is what you call tolls?
A. No, sir; what I call tolls is the use of the road simply, where the
shipper furnishes motive power as well as cars.
Q. Are you limited as to that?
A. I think there is no limit; I don't think there is any rate of tolls fixed
in our charter, but I will not speak positively; if there is it is in the Leg-
gctt's Gap charter, in 1832.
Q. Don't that fix it expressly at 1^ cents per ton per mile on coal?
A. If I was going to answer that question I would say no; I have not
read it for a good while; so far as any regulation of tolls, under the char-
ter of 1832, is concerned, that has been abrogated since; we are under the
nineteenth section of the general railroad law of 1849.
Q. Do you own coal lands? .
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How much?
A. Well I could not state with any reasonably degree of accuracy; if I
was going to approximate I would say from 7,000 to 8.000 acres.
Q. Does your charter allow that?
A. I believe our legal rights would allow us to hold some 12,000 or 15,000
acres.
Q. How many collieries have you got?
A. A large number; I cannot tell the exact number.
Q. How did you come to fix ju3t that rate—four cents 1
A. We thought it was a reasonable rate for the short distances; there
was none of it carried over GO miles; a good deal of it 10 and 1G miles.
Q. Had you had a rate ever before of any kind for transporting coal?
A. Years ago we transported coal to some extent for other parties, in
their cars. /
(
. I
1
<pb>
Q. Did you transport coal in your own cars prior to that time for any
rate?
A. Not to amount to any thing; we may occasionally have sent a very
few car loads.
Q. What did you charge for that?
A. I cannot tell you; I don't think we sent a dozen car loads ; I recol-
lect, in two or three instances, we sent it for nothing, as a matter of ac-
commodation.
Q. Didn't you have a charge whether you sent much or little—was not
the rule that it should be 1| cents per ton per mile?
A. Never.
Q. Was it more than that'!
A. Oh yes; we always charged more than that when we charged.
Q. How much more?
A. I cannot tell; this was several years ago.
Q. You use your read principally for carrying your own coal?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How much coal had you on hand at the time of this suspension?
A. Well it would be guess-work; perhaps, all told, 150,000 tons, which
would not any thing like cover the quantity we had then sold in advance,
to be delivered; we had sold it to be delivered, as we sell monthly to be
delivered.
Q. You always make j'our contracts ahead?
A. No, sir; but we sell at auction one month the product we anticipate
obtaining for delivery the next month.
Q. What was the price that you sold this 150.000 tons at?
A. I cannot give the figures; I guess the average at the last auction sale
was less than $4 00 at Elizabethport.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. What was the average number of tons carried,
since the first of December, over your road?
A. I cannot answer the question precisely, it would be guess work; it
has been less than 200.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. You mean for other people?
A. For any body; we had none.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. When was work suspended in your collieries?
A. The 1st of December.
Q. Had the rates of toll any thing to do with the suspension?
A. Not at all.
Q. You had no rates at all before the 1st of December?
A. No, sir. ,
Q. You could not supply enough to fill your contracts?
A. I know we did not; a good many sued us.
By Mr. Hall Q. These 200 tons that you send belongs to other people?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Is there any proviso about these sales you make &t auction in New
York as to delivery—suppose there is a strike or break?
A. There is a provision in the conditions of our sales that if we are pre-
vented from obtaining the coal by reason of strikes or obstructions to the
transportation, we shall be exonerated. i
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. You did deliver this 150,000 tons f
A. We delivered all we had to deliver, with the exception of such a
quantity as we deemed we would require for use in our loconnotives.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. I understood that you were sued?
A. Yes, sir. . 1
Q. Did they recover? ^
A. They have not been tried. They said the conditions \i'ere invalid.
<pb>
Thomas Diqkson, called by Mr. Hall, being duty sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. What road are you conected with?
A. The Delaware and Hudson canal and railroad company; the railroad
runs from the mines to Honesdale—32 miles.
Q. When was that incorporated?
A. In 1823.
Q. In Pennsylvania?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Had it been incorporated in New York before?
A. Yes, sir; our corporate rights are in the State of New York.
Q. What do they charge on that road for carrying coal now?
A. We have not any charge at all; we have not carried any.
Q. Have not you a rate?
A. No, sir; we never carried any coal for anybody else except for the
Erie railroad company, under especial rate.
Q. Have not you a tariff in existence now?
A. No, sir; we have a gravity road; the road was built for the purpose
of carrying the coal of the company; we never carried for anybody else;
never had anybody offer it to us, for the reason that when we get out to
Honesdale it is difficult to separate it from our own coal; there has never
been any arrangement for transporting it there.
Q. You don't ship for other people?
A. We ship under a contract for the Erie railroad company; we get
from them the same rate they charge us—about one and sixteenth cents per
mile; we cross the mountain over one thousand feet elevation; we are
allowed twenty miles for overcoming that elevation; our distance is fifty-
four miles by adding that.
Q. That would make how much a mile? t
A. We get $1 60 for fifty-four miles; it is on a sliding scale.
Q. That has not been changed?
A. No, sir.
Q. Were you represented" at a Philadelphia meeting of different railroad
companies?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. When was that?
A. About a month ago.
Q. Who called it?
A. I don't recollect.
Q. Who was at it?
A. I was there for one, Mr. Gowen, Mr. Brisbin, Mr. Sloan, Judge Packer,
Mr. Clark, and a number of gentlemen from the Lehigh region.
Q. What did you do at that meeting?
A. We bad a general discussion.
Q. What did you determine there; I am confining you strictly to your
rates?
A. I don't know anything about that; I simply know that Mr. Gowen
sent me his rates of toll at New York before I attended the meeting.
Q. Don't you know that he sent it to every other one of those gentle-
men who were there before that?
A. I do not.
Q. Did not you hear them say so?
A. No, sir.
Q. You don't know what was done with anybody outside of yourself?
A. No, sir.
<pb>
Q. You made no change?
A. No, sir; we had nothing offered to us.
Q. Would you have carried it if you had?
A. I don't know; it depends entirely upon circumstances.
Q. Did not you know what the rate would be?
A. Not until the offer was made; we don't take things by guess.
By Mr. Lamberton—Q. Was there anything said or done about tolls at
that meeting in Philadelphia?
A. I have no recollection of it at all.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. You mean to say you did not hear anything—you
do not mean to state that these other gentlemen did not do anything?
A. No, sir
John Brisbin, being re-called, testified as follows:
In my testimony it might appear that I professed to name all the roads
that we operate. There is the Valley railroad that I did not mention,
running from the State line between Pennsylvania and New York; then
there is the Oswego and Syracuse railroad, from Syracuse to Oswego; that
is a leased road; and then there is the Green and Utica and Susquehanna
Valley railroads; they form connecting links; we own the line from Os-
wego to Ithaca.
By Mr. Olmsted Q. You charge the same rate on your New York
branches as you are charging in Pennsylvania—four cents per mile?
A. I think we have sent no coal for other parties; none has gone fur-
ther than Binghampton; we charge the same rate clear to Binghampton.
E. W. Clark, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as follows:
* Q. What road are you an officer of?
A. I am president of the Lehigh coal and navigation company.
Q. When was it chartered?
A. I think in 1816.
Q. You carry coal on your road?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What is the length of your road?
A. Our main line runs from about three miles beyond Wilkesbarre to
Phillipsburg—about 103 miles.
Q. What is the length of your branches, and what are their names?
A. We have what is called the Nantinoke branch, about eight miles,
which also extends to the collieries on the river. We lease the road from
Union Junction to Scranton, which is sixteen miles; we have the Nesque-
honing branch and the Gravity road extending to our own mines; I think
that is all.
Q. You mine yourself?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Largely!
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many collieries have you got?
A. I think we have ten.
Q. How many acres of coal land do you own?
A. Between 12,000 and 13,000.
Q. What are the rates of coal on your road now?
A. I think they are four cents a ton per mile.
Q. When did you make them?
<pb>
A. At the same time the Lehigh Valley did; we always fix our rates
together.
Q. What had they been before—the same as the Lehigh Valley?
A. Yes, sir; we are parallel lines, and meet together and fix the rate.
Q. They are two different roads entirely?
A. Yes, sir; but instead of fighting each other continually we try to
work in harmony.
Q. Be pleased to state what the rates had been prior to that time.
A. I think about one cent and six-tenths.
Q. The Lehigh Valley had been about the same 1
A. Exactly the same.
Q. How much coal have you been carrying since the increased rate.
A. One week, I think, we carried as high as 8,000 tons.
Q. What had you been carrying prior to the raise?
A. We had not carried anything for several weeks.
/ Q. What is your capacity?
A. About 40,000 tons, but we never reached that.
Q. What were you carrying 1
A. About 20,000 or 25,000 tons a week.
Q. Are you carrying for anyoperators, or have you since you increased
your rates, at a less rate than four cents a ton per mile?
A. We have contract with one company for the transportation of a large
amount of coal,' I am under the impression that we have carried some for
them; that is the Wilkesbarre coal and iron company.
Q. What rate?
A. It depends upon the price realized from the coal; I have no means
of knowing the rate.
Q. What rate for October or November?
A. They are very nice fractions.
Q. Was it under two cents?
A. Yes, sir; it has always been under two.
Q. Has it been increased for that particular shipper?
A. It was always increased when coal goes up and always diminished
when coal goes down.
Q. Have they been paying more than two cents at any time during the
last six months?
A. No, sir.
Q. That is the company that Mr. Parrish is connected with?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. What is the capacity of your road?
A. It is a new road; we never worked it up to its full capacity, which
is'about 40,000 tons a week.
Q. How much were you carrying before the 1st of December?
A. About 20,000 tons.
Q. How much did you carry after the 1st of December before you put
up the rates?
A. The tonnage gradually dropped off; I think from 20,000 to 25,000
tons, until the strike.
Q. When did you increase the toll?
A. Sometime late in February.
Q. Then from the time of the strike up to the time of the increase, how
much were you carrying?
A. I think we carried absolutely nothing; there were no collieries in
operation.
<pb>
Q. Tou were carrying nothing from the time of the strike up to the time
you increased the rate of toll?
A. Almost nothing.
Q. How much since?
A. I think one week we ran up to 8,000 tons—last week it was about
2,000; I got the report this morning,. " not a car received in any colliery."
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. Had you men in your employ sufficient to move
25,000 tons H
A. Yes, sir; we had everything prepared to move 40,000 tons.
By Mr. Hall Q. You have been keeping men in your employ to move
15,000 tons that you never did move?
A. We are a new road, with a growing business, and have preparations
for more than we carry. .
Q. Does the business seem to be growing very fast?
A. The last report was, " not a single car."
Q. Were you at the Philadelphia meeting of railroad people?
A. I was at several meetings.
Q. At the same time the Lehigh Valley people were there 'I
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Was it there that you fixed these rates.?
A. No, sir.
Q. It was done simultaneously with them.
A. Simultaneously with the Lehigh Valley?
Q. Had you information before that what the increase would be on that
road?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. On the other roads—the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western?
A. It is the first I have heard of those rates.
Q. Did not you meet them afterwards from the different roads at those
meetings?
A. I met some gentlemen there.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. Was there anything said about the tolls there?
A. I don't think anything was said in a general way; there was no ac-
tion about tolls.
Q. When did your road go into full operation?
A. We were prepared for other business, I think, three years ago.
Q. From that time up to the present there has been harmony Detween
you and the Lehigh Valley road I
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Your line3 are parallel?
A. Yes, sir; one is on one side of the Lehigh river and one on the other.
By Mr. Hall—Q. And you acted in conjunction with them in this in-
crease?
A. Yes, sir; and in every movement that has been made.
David T. Bound re-called by Mr. Hall.
The following circular was shown witness and offered in evidence:
On and after this date, and until further notice, the rates of transporta-
tion of coal will be as follows:
<pb>
From Pittston, Shickshinny and all points between, to—
Beach Haven $2 00
Berwick 2 10
Lime Ridge 2 15
Espy 2 20
Bloomsburg 2 20
Rupert 2 20
Danville 2 50
Northumberland 2 75
(Signed) DAVID T. BOUND, Superintendent.
Q. Is that your circular issued by your road?
A. Yes, sir.
Adjourned until to-morrow evening at 7£ o'clock.
Harrisburo, Thursday, March 16, 1871.
The committee met at half-past seven o'clock P. M., all the members be-
ing present.
Mr. Hall said he would rest, with the exception of offering the charters
of the various transporting companies.
Mr. Lamberton.—We propose to reply by showing to you the true condi-
tion of affairs in the coal regions, and claim that, under the resolution, you
have full power to make inquiry into the cause of the present troubles.
Our offer is to prove that the demands made by the Workingmen's Benevo-
lent association were such that it was impossible to carry on the coal in-
dustry of this Commonwealth.
Mr. Hall.—What is the offer?
Mr. Lamberton We offer to prove that the demands made by the Work-
ingmen's Benevolent association rendered it impossible for the operators
to work at the rates demanded, and that they were compelled to refuse to
accede to those demands, because they would have worked at a loss; that
this was the cause of the suspension of work in the mining regions and
the cause of the high price of coal, and that it was not the increase of tolls
or transportation charges.
Mr. Hall contended that the committee would be going outside of their
duties by hearing the testimony on that point.
The committee decided to hear the testimony.
William Kendrick, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Where do you live '(
A. I live in Pottsville.
Q. What is your business?
A. Miner and shipper of coal.
Q. How long have you been in that business t
A. I have been engaged in mining for a good many years; as a shipper
only for the last six years.
Q. You were brought up to work at the mines?
A. Yes, sir; I have been working at the mines since I was twelve years
old.
Q. What position do you occupy in the Anthracite Board of Trade?
A. I am its president.
6
<pb>
Q. Of what is that board composed?
A. It is composed of a number of local associations—some five or six—
through the Schuylkill coal region, represented by delegates.
Q. Associations of operators?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What amount of coal tonnage does your board of trade represent?
A. It represented, in 1869, something over four millions of tons.
Q. State whether, at the time the strike in Schuylkill county occurred,
on the 10th of January, there was any dispute between you and the men
upon the subject of wages?
A. There was not any.
Q. Under what rate of wages were they then working?
A. They were working, during the latter part of last year, under what
was known as the Gowen compromise.
Q. State whether that did or did not permit the price of labor to slide
down to a basis of two dollars; if it was as low?
A. Yes, sir; that was the understanding; they were working on the
three dollar basis, sliding down to two dollars.
Q. State what rate of wages was demanded by the Workingmen's Benevo-
lent association after the strike took place, as a condition upon which they
would resume work; what did they demand?
A. They demanded the three dollar basis as a minimum, provided the
operators in the Luzerne and Carbon districts remained firm on this ques-
tion of suspension.
Q. Who demanded this three dollar basis?
Mr. Hall objected, unless it was shown that the Workingmen's Benevo-
lent association made the demand.
Mr. Gowen said the object was to show that the workmen at witness's.
colliery made the demand.
Objection over-ruled.
Q. State who it was that demanded this three dollar basis?
A. The three dollar basis was demanded only quite recently; it was de-
manded through the General Council, published in The Anthracite Moni-
tor—the official order.
Mr. Gowen offered in evidence copy of Anthracite Monitor, containing
minutes of meeting of the Workingmen's Benevolent association, at Potts-
ville, January 28, 1871.
Objected to by Mr. Hall.
Mr. Gowen said it would be followed up by the proof that this was the
official organ.
Objection over-ruled.
Q. State what occurred when this document was made—did the opera-
tors agree to work?
A. No, sir; not at that time; the suspension Was not ended.
Q. When it was ended, on the 13th of February?
A. Then they met at a committee at which I was not present; I under-
stood from some who were there, that they had made a proposition on the
three dollar basis—working down to $2 50.
Q. State whether, at this three dollar basis as a minimum, the operators
could have gone at work if the others were at work?
A. I don't think they could; not the season through.
Q. What was the average price of coal during the four months of the
preceding year?
A. The five months, commencing on the first of August to the first of
January, it was $2 46, and a fraction per ton at Port Carbon.
<pb>
Q. Paying the. $3 00 basis as a minimum, or the wages, the men would
be entitled to at $3 00, could coal be produced and sold at $2 46?
Objected to by Mr. Hall. Admitted.
Q. Could you produce coal at your own collieries?
A. No, sir; we could produce it at a loss. .
Q. If you paid the $3 00 basis as a minimum?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall Q. What time do you speak of?
A. Any time during this year.
By Mr. Gowen Q. I want you to tell us whether the action of the
Reading railroad company, in raising tolls, had anything to do with the
decision of the Anthracite Board of Trade, that they would not go to
work?
Objected to by Mr. Hall. Objection over-ruled.
Q. State whether it was the action of the Reading railroad company, in
raising the rates of toll, that was the cause of your refusal to accept the
offer of the men and go to work at the $3 00 basis?
A. No, sir; on the contrary the trade generally had agreed that thuy
would not resume work at the offer of the $3 00 basis as a minimum.
Q. State, when the refusal of your association and the operators gen-
erally to go to work took place, whether that was before or after the com-
pany had raised the tolls?
A. Before.
Q. How much tonnage do you think the operator* of Schuylkill county,
who did not belong and did not agree to this refusal of yours, to accept—
those who are outside—how much tonnage do you think they could furnish
to the road in a week?
A. 1 can answer that question by stating what occurred last year, dur-
ing the suspension of four months; the tonnage run then from 20,000 to
25,000 tons a week. I don't know what it would be in this case.
Paper shown witness.
Q. State what that is, and if is the original paper?
A. This one is a proposition that I was a party to; my name is attached
to it; it is for an adjusting of wages of 1871; this is the original docu-
ment. .'"
Mr. Hall objected to the part of the paper which says that the committee
on the part of the Anthracite Board of Trade, and the committee on the
part of the Workingmen's Benevolent association, respectfully recommended
the adoption of the agreement, unless it is to be followed by proof that the
recommendation was adopted, and accepted by the Workingmen's Benevo-
lent association,
Mr. Gowen said he proposed to follow it by the declaration of the offi-
cers that it had been adopted.
Objection over-ruled.
Q. Were you present when this paper was signed?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Bid you see the gentlemen whose names are attached to that paper;
did you see them sign it?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What position does Mr. Siney hold in the Workingmen's Benevolent
association?
A. He is president of Schuylkill county.
Q. Who were these others signing on behalf of the association?
A. They were known as a committee appointed by the executive board
<pb>
of Schuylkill county; they had been representing themselves as such at
previous meetings.
Q. They made these representations in the presence of Mr. Siney?
A. I suppose so.
Q. Was not Mr. Siney present with them?
A. He was; they came there as the representatives of the executive
board of Schuylkill county W. B. A., and it was so understood.
Q. State whether that paper was ever brought to you in connection with
a sub-committee?
A. It was brought by a sub-committee appointed by the two committees
on the day that it was signed by the parties.
Q. When was that?
A. In November last year; it was a few days after this meeting took
place, on the 7th of November; I think it was on the Wednesday follow-
ing that they went to Philadelphia to ask you to become a party to this
arrangement.
Q. Who else was with Mr. Siney?
A. Mr. Ryan, Mr. Cole and myself.
Q. State what occurred then?
A. When this proposition was presented to you (Mr. Gowen) for your
concurrence and co-operation, you seemed perfectly satisfied with the ar-
rangement, and expressed yourself as being willing to go into it provided
you could have a guarantee that there should be no strikes during the year
1871; you thought it was a little premature just then to state at what rate
you would carry your co* for 1871; the trade was dull, and if it became
known that the rates would be low parties would not buy.
Q. Was not that idea acquiesced in by the workingmen and yourself?
A. I understood so.
Q. Was there the slightest objection made to the action I proposed to
take by the workingmen on that occasion?
A. I never heard any.
Q. Did they express themselves as satisfied with that interview?
A. I think they did; it is my impression that they did.
Q. Did you at any time after that, or Mr. Siney, or any officer of that
association, say any thing about the adoption of that recommendation?
A. Sometime after our meeting with you in Philadelphia Mr. Siney was
in our office one afternoon, in Pottsville; Mr. George Cole was present and
talked over matters in connection with the trade; this subject came up; I
asked him if the men had ratified this proposition, and he said there was
no difficulty about that whatever, that it was all right, and there would be
no trouble about it; he said we could work right along on it; he said that
the men would accept it and go to work on it.
Q. State whether the offer that you now make to the men is not the same
that is recommended in that paper?
A. It is the same; the offer which the operators now make is the same.
Q. When was this offer of the operators made 1
A. A few days after the meeting in Philadelphia; I don't know exactly.
Q. State whether you and the others are ready to go to work if the men
would accept it?
A. Yes, sir; we would go to work at once.
Q. That is if the men would accept the offer, which is identically the
same as the officers recommended, and which you hold in your hand, the
operators would go to work?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. I want to draw your attention to another matter—the controversy be-
<pb>
tween the officers and men as to the claim made by the Workingmen's as-
sociation to control and dictate at the collieries; what do you know about
that, especially with reference to any particular instances in any colliery
that you own?
Mr. Hall objected, for the reason that it was opening out another ques-
tion between the collieries and the W. B. A., and had nothing to do with
any question that this committee have the right or the power to inquire
into, and that it was in no manner relevant to the resolution offered in the
Senate by Mr. Turner. Objection over-ruled.
Q. State what you know about these demands and any thing about your
particular colliery, and state the circumstances fully?
A. I will premise a little by saying that I was a party to the signing Gf
the agreement, known as the Gowen compromise; in that agreement one of
the conditions was—
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Have you got that paper? .
A. Yes, sir; it is here somewhere; one of the conditions of that agree-
ment was that there should be no interference.
Mr. Hall objected to the contents of any written paper, the paper not
being presented.
Witness.—I know it was a part of the agreement that there should be
no interference.
By Mr. Davis.—Q. Tell what you know of your own knowledge?
Mr. Hall.—The best evidence is the paper itself.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. Go on and state any circumstances that you know
about your own colliery?
A. After working some thirty days after the resumption of work, the
men at the St. Clair shaft refused to work; that is one of our collieries;
they refused to work because four men had .been working there during the'
suspension. mining coal to keep my pumps running; because these four
men had been working, in violation of the resolution passed that there
should be no "dead work" done, they refused to work; these four men were
working not at a reduction of the wages, but at the three dollar basis.
Q. Explain what "dead work" means.
A. Dead work means work in the mines for any purpose—repairing, &c.
Q. State what occurred at your colliery?
A. Two of the men immediately left the place; they told me they would
not keep the place idle; the other two did not do so for four or five days;
they then agreed they would not stand in the way.
Q. How long was your colliery idle?
A. Four or five days.
Q. What does it cost you to keep your colliery idle?
A. About $150 a day at that time.
Q. Those four men were then obliged to leave their work 'i
A. Yes, sir; and go away.
Q. Have you any personal knowledge of your own of any instances of
this kind at other places?
A. I cannot speak of my own knowledge; I have heard rumors.
Q. What amount of money is invested in your colliery?
A. There has been half a million of dollars spent at that colliery—not
by us.
Q. What would it cost to open a colliery of that magnitude?
A. $150,000.
Q. Suppose you had not been able to keep your pumps running and the
colliery had been drowned out, how much would it cost you to pump it out
again?
<pb>
Objected to by Mr. ITall; objection over-ruled.
A. At that same eolliery, some five years ago, after it had been burned
down, I pumped the water out of the mine, and I think it was something
like $2G,000.
Q. In your opinion, as a coal operator, is it at all conducive to the in-
terests of the coal trade that you should have control over your own pro-
perty and those whom you employ—is it injurious or beneficial for them to
render your colliery idle when they please?
A. Very injurious.
By Mr. Hall Q. Do you own these men?
A. No, sir; they have owned me for sometime.
Q. Did you own those four men who quit laboring there I
A. I did not; I employed them and paid them.
Q. Had you any right to make them work if they did not want to?
A. Certainly not.
Q. In quitting they did what they had a legal right to do?
A. I do not claim that they had a legal right to quit; they had a legal
right to work.
Q. The four men quit because they wanted to relieve you of the diffi-
culty?
A. Certainly.
Q. Those four men had a right to quit 1
A. Certainly.
Q. Had no more right to quit than the other men that were there?
A. They quit after the men had made a demand; that they would not
work anymore until these men were discharged.
Q. Has not any man under you a right to quit unless he has a contract
with you to work a particular length of time?
A. Certainly. -'
Q. Have you been successful as a coal operator?
A. Yes, sir; part of the time.
Q. Have you made money?
A. Certainly; I have lost some, too.
Q. How many men have you in your employ?
A. Really, I don't know; I guess some 400 or 500, men and boys, when
we are working.
Q. What agreement was made in the latter end of December, last year,
with the men in regard to mining coal 7
A. On the 29th of December we met a committee of the workingmen for
the purpose of adjusting wages; for the month of January they demanded
the $3 basis for the work to be done in the month of January, which we,
for a time, refused, and it finally ended in an agreement to pay them the
$3 basis, provided the suspension became general in Schuylkill, Carbon and
Luzerne.
Q. Why did you want the suspension to become general?
A. We did not want it; it was only a condition to fixing the wages.
Q. You agreed to give more if it did than if it did not?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And yet you did not want it?
A. No, sir.
Q. You paid money then for what you did not want?
A. Certainly.
Q. What dj you mean by this $3 basis?
A. I mean the price of coal at Port Carbon; wages based upon that
price.
<pb>
Q. You mean that if you got $3 a ton for the coal at Port Carbon the
men were to get so and so?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What is that so and so?
A. The wages, at the $3 basis, would be $11, $12 and $13 a week for out-
side work; inside laborers $12.
Q. The miners how much?
A. Fourteen dollars per week.
Q. Is that too much for the men to get?
A. No, sir; not working by wages.
Q. What would the men get at the $2 50 basis at Port Carbon?
A. Strictly on that basis, and on the reduction we would make, the wages
would be $9 19, for outside laborers; inside, $10 02 and $11 6T, I think,
for miners.
Q. These laborers and miners very often have families, do they not J
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have you a store at your place?
A. No, sir.
Q. Is it possible for many of these men to live at $9 19 a week with their
families, and not get into debt?
A. They have managed the last year to live on a great deal less; I know
they have not worked much.
Q. Have you any knowledge of any men in your section of the country
who do live on less, except these miners?
A. I don't know anything about anybody else.
Q. How many days did your colliery work in December, 1870?
A. About thirteen, I think.
Q. Who would lose on account of the lost time?
A. I think we would all lose.
Q. What made you stop?
A. The condition of the market was such that we could not dispose of
our coal.
Q. Then when you stop because the condition of the market is such that
you cannot dispose of your coal these men do not get $9 19 a week?
A. They do not get anything when they are idle.
Q. Do they get anything when they are sick?
A. We don't pay them when they are sick.
Q. Do you know the rule of your association in regard to beneficials
amongst themselves—paying the sick?
A. I know nothing more than what their constitution and by-laws call
for.
Q. That provides that they shall contribute?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What did the men that worked for you get in the previous Novem-
ber?
A. The basis of $2 25 per ton.
Q. What would the outside laborers get from you on the basis of $2 25
per ton at Port Carbon?
N A. They would get 8| per cent. less than the above figures.
Q. What would the figures?
A. The outside laborer would get $8 28.
Q. For a whole week's labor?
A. Yes, sir.
Q: What would an inside laborer get?
A. Nine dollars.
<pb>
Q. And a miner?
A. Ten dollars and fifty-four cents.
Q. If they could hardly live at $9 19 how could they live at $8 28 a
week?
A. I don't say they could; I don't know that they.could live; that was
the rate of wages understood; I paid the same as anybody; I do not go
into private families to inquire into their affairs; it is none of my business.
Q. It is none of your business, and you don't care?
A. Certainly, I care; I like to see everybody do well.
CJ. Don't you consider those wages exceedingly low?
A. I don't know that they are in comparison witb the price paid for labor
in other branches of work.
Q. How long have you been in the coal business?
A. As an operator twelve or fourteen years.
Q. Is there any business that you know of which is attended with more
danger to the men than working under ground in this way?
A. There is considerable danger attending under-ground work.
Q. Is there danger to their health, and does their health give way?
A. Certainly, it gives way; everybody gives way when they get old.
Q. What is the average life of a miner who works under ground?
A. Really, I don't know.
Q. Don't it cripple them so that they are good for very little work after
thirty-five?
A. I have seen many good ones at fifty.
Q. Do you know that the life insurance companies take them?
A. I don't know.
Q. A man works at the rate you paid—$10 54—under ground at con-
siderable danger to his life and continual danger to his health?
A. There was not many doing it at that rate.
Q. Did you lose money during the year 1869?
A. I did not make any.
Q. Did you lose money during 1870?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did the men carry out the Gowen compromise for 1870?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Was that to extend any longer?
A. No, sir.
Q. You arbitrarily reduced the wages from the $3 00 basis down to
$2 25, without consulting the men?
A. No, sir; it was an agreement.
Q. Did you consult the men?
A. Yes, sir; and they agreed to it.
Q. Did they agree to take $2 25?
A. Certainly.
Q. And signed a written paper?
A. They signed a paper to work at the Gowen compromise, and they
agreed to work at $2 00 even.
Q. Then the Gowen compromise was a compromise that would have re-
duced the wages under certain circumstances, to twenty-five cents a week?
A. Noj sir; there was a limit to $2 00 a ton.
Q. How much under that compromise would the outside laborer get if
you got $2 00 a ton at Port Carbon, under the Gowen compromise?
A. The outside laborer, $7 37; inside, $8 04; miner, $9 38 per week.
Q. How many acres of land do you control?
<pb>
A. We have in one lease 400 acres; I don't know how many acres in the
other, probably four of that.
Q. Would you think it strange, as an operator, that when the waj;es of
men were reduced, under the Gowen compromise, to $7 00 a week, they
would want the price of coal higher if that was the only way they could
get their wages increased?
A. I have no doubt they wanted them higher; I have worked for a good
deal less in the mines years ago.
Question repeated.
A. I would not think it strange that they should want more.
Q. You desired a suspension of all the other collieries in order that your
price might be increased?
A. No, sir; never did.
Q. Did you want them to work in the other counties 1
A. We had nothing to do with other counties.
Q. Did you try to get the operators in Schuylkill to get the miners in
Luzerne not to work?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you have any agreement with them looking to that?
A. No, sir; we made that agreement for January, and agreed to give
them more than others if they suspended.
Q. How much more did you get that year after they suspended than be-
fore ?,
A. We only worked some seven days.
Q. Why?
A. The suspension took place; the men struck.
Q. Was not the reason that you agreed to pay more if there was a sus-
pension than if there was not, that you would make more money if they
suspended than if they did not?
A. No, sir.
Q. It was for the simple reason that you wanted to give the men more?
A. Oh, no.
Q. What was the agreement?
A. It was thought we should pay three dollars for the month of January
if the suspension was successful; if not $2 50.
Q. Was that to be a success to you?
A. The suspension was to be total.
Q. Would you thus make more money and be able to pay more money?
A. For a few days.
Q. What was the condition of the market after that suspension which
yom induced?
A. I induced no suspension.
Q. How much was the advance in the price of coal 1
A. Probably seventy-five cents a ton.
Q. How much would you have made at paying the advanced wages all
the year'/
A. I might have made a little money.
Q. What do you know about the Anthracite Monitor?
A. Not much; it is said to be a paper published by the Workingmen's
Benevolent association.
Q. Do you know that it is?
A. I have every reason to believe it is; I know they call it their official
organ—Mr. Siney and others.
Q. You don't know anything more about it than what you have stated?
A. It is said tc be their organ.
<pb>
Q. What could coal have been worked for that season?
A. We might have worked at the proposition we offered them, $2 50.
Q. Why did you stop your mines after the Scranton sales in December?
A. On account of the dull sales for coal.
Q. It was not because the workmen refused to work?
A. No, sir.
Q. Is your Anthracite Board of Trade incorporated?
A. Yes, sir; by the courts.
Q. Did your board act in concert with any corporations in what you
have done about this business?
A. No, sir.
Q. Were you not represented in a meeting held lately in Philadelphia?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did not you act in concert then'
!
A. I acted as a delegate of a general meeting of the coal trade; I as-
sented to what the meeting did; I was with them and a party to all the
deliberations.
Q. Did Mr. Gowen acquiesce in that agreement for 1871?
A. He did not oppose it.
Q. Did he acquiesce 1
A. He said he would; he did not object.
(j. Did he afterwards announce his tolls?
A. He did not. «
(4. Did not he increase afterwards?
A. Yes, sir.
IJ. How much?
A. Four dollars a ton.
Q. Was that a violation of the agreement that you and Siney and Mr.
Gowen had, or not, in your judgment?
A. Mr. Gowen I don't suppose felt himself bound by that agreement
after the general suspension took place and this agreement of ours set
aside.
Q. Siney said there would be no difficulty—that the men would accept?
Did he say the men would accept?
A. He said there would be no difficulty.
Did Siney tell you that the men had accepted this offer?
A. He told me there was no difficulty.
Q. Was it not a mere proposition for adjusting the wages of 1871?
A. Certainly.
Q. Do you know that the association ever accepted it?
A. No more than what Mr. Siney told me; Mr. Colo was there when he
told me they had accepted.
i.\ Don't you know that this agreement says: "Provided, That a satis-
factory arrangement be made with.the Philadelphia and Reading railroad
•oinpany for a reduction of tolls?"
A. Yes, sir.
Q. AVas there a reduction?
A. No.
Q,. Did not an increase take place?
A. Yes, sir. \
Q. And these men told you they accepted?
A. Certainly; it was previous to the suspension taking plaice.
Q. Did they say they had accepted?
A. They did not say it had been accepted, but there would be no trouble
about it.
■
<pb>
Q. You were a party to the Gowen compromise?
A. Yes, sir. ,
Q. What was it you said cost you half a million?
A. I guess the colliery I mentioned, from the time it was started, cost
that much; I have repaired it; we have about $75,000 invested in it.
Q. You have been making this $75,000 out of men at the rate of wages
of 7, 8, 9 and 11 dollars a week?
A. No, sir; we have been paying them as high wages as any body in the
region.
Q. Do you blame these laboring men for attempting to get their wages
increased when they are at these rates you have named?
A. I blame them for precipitating this general strike; I don't think they
are doing right.
Q. You think you did not precipitate thi8 strike when you said you would
pay 50 cents more if they quit work in the other counties?
A. No, sir.
Q. You blame these men though?
A. Yes, sir.
il. They did wrong?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And you did not?
A. According to your doctrine I am doing good, because I am advancing
their wages.
Q. By putting their men idle?
A. I did not help their men to do that; I deny it.
Q. You paid the money out for nothing?
A. No; I paid them under the agreement.
Q. Is there not an arrangement among operators by which if there is a
strike at a colliery you will not employ the men at work in that colliery?
A. No, sir.
Q. Has there ever been such?
A. Yes, sir; some two or three years ago.
[Cards produced giving names of men who had struck at certain collieries.]
Q. Did you ever issue any cards like that from your establishment?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you ever get them from other collieries?
A. No, sir. ''
(l- Did you ever get any like these?
"Ashland, Pa., April 20, 1868.
"The following miners struck for wages at Lewis & Co.'s colliery while
they were employed as leaders:
"Michael Appleby, [giving other names.]
"James , James Rose were leaders in the recent strike at John An-
derson & Co.'8 colliery, and are not now employed by said firm."
A. I never saw anything like that; in 1869 there was a resolution passed
not to employ each other's men when on strike.
Q. What is the difference between that and this?
A. Not much, but we repealed the resolution soon; it did not work to
our advantage; we thought we were doing right when it was passed.
Q. Do you think so still?
A. No matter what I think now.
Q. You decline to answer what you think now?
A. Yes, sir.
<pb>
Q. Have you ever attempted to change the tolls on the Reading railroad
yourself?
A.I have been one of a committee to solicit the president to reduce the
tolls?
Q. When?
A. In 1869.
Q. What were the tolls in 1869 when you so acted.
A. I don't exactly remember.
Q. You call all the charge that they have tolls?
A. Yes, sir; we call it all tolls; that is the general understanding of the
coal men.
Q. What were the charges in 1869 when you made that attempt?
A. Not as high as now.
Q. You demurred in 1869 but don't now?
A. We are not prepared to ship any now.
Q. You don't demur now?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you demur in 1870?
A. I think not.
Q. Did you fix the amount in 1869 when you did demur?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did they reduce it at that time?
A. I think not.
Q. Are you interested in the Reading railroad as stockhelder?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you know whether they are not large owners of coal lands which
they propose to work?
A. I do not.
Q. Have you ever got drawbacks on the road?
A. We have been paying tolls on which a drawback was given.
Q. In what year?
A. In the last two years.
Q. How much did it amount to?
A. I cannot tell.
Q. How long did the men stand out against the reduction before they
submitted to the Gowen compromise?
A. About four months.
Q. Why did mot you work full time in September?
A. We were prevented by break downs; that was not the fault of the
men?
Q. Has this W. B. A. made any offer to work at the $3 00 basis?
A. Yes, sir; in Pottsville, some time in February.
Q. Who was there on the part of the workingmen?
A. Mr. Siney, Mr. Waters, Mr. Ryan, and the others I forget; they
offered to go to work at the $3 basis, working down to $2 50.
Q. Who did the speaking?
A. Mr. Siney and Mr. Waters.
Q. Who else was there besides these men and you?
A. Mr. George Cole, Mr. T. K. Seidfried, Mr. Snyder and others.
Q. How long did the conversation last?
A. Probably an hour.
Q. Did you agree to it?
A. No, sir.
Q. What did they say, and what did you say?
A. The substance was that they made us the offer and we refused it.
<pb>
Why did you refuse it?
A. We thought it was not a proper basis to work ou successfully.
Q. Did not you say you had not power until after the Philadelphia
meeting?
A. I said we were not prepared to treat with them.
Q. Until after the Philadelphia meeting?
A. I don't know that there was anything said about the Philadelphia
meeting.
Q. Why were you not prepared to treat? Was it not because yon were
to have a meeting in Philadelphia?
A. Perhaps.
Q. Who was to meet in Philadelphia?
A. The parties who met in New York; I was one, Mr. Gowen was one,
and Mr. Packer, and the other gentlemen Were there.
Q. Were you prepared after that meeting to accept?
A. No, sir; we have not been prepared since.
Q. Because it was so determined at the meeting?
A. It was determined what proposition we would work on.
Q. You don't complain, as an operator along the line of the Reading
railroad, that they charged the present prices of freight on coal?
A. I have no reason to complain; I am not freighting any coal.
Q. What did you offer to pay your men last month?
A. Offered to pay them at the basis of $2 50, and the.y demanded $3.
Q. What does it cost to put a ton of coal on the cars at your colliery'!
A. Two dollars.
Q. What does it cost to run that to Philadelphia?
A. About $1 65 or $1 70.
Q. Then if they charged $6 08 how much would they make?
A. It would depend upon the price they get in Philadelphia; I don't
know anything about what they make; I am not engaged in the railroad
business.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. Did you ever get any drawbacks from the company
that were not published to the world, and which everybody else was entitled
to.
A. No, sir.
Q. You have stated that miners got, according to the Gowen compro-
mise, $12 a week at a certain state of the market, and sliding down; it also
went up?
A. Certainly.
Q. Without reference to the men working by the week t
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What proportion of miners worked underground work by the week?
A. I do not suppose they will average five to a colliery.
Q. At what rates did the miners work?
A. At rates we can make by contract—by the yard or wagon.
Q. At the rate of wages that have been paid for the four months of last
year, how much could a good miner make at those wages, for eight or ten
hours a day.
A. We have some 27 collieries, where they make an average of $3 62 a
day; we have returns from 27 collieries, under oath, and the men made
that amount.
Q. How much can a good miner make in your breast by working ten
hours a day, at the rate you have paid for the last five years?
A. From 70 to 100 dollars a month.
<pb>
Q. Would not you and the other operators be willing to increase the rate
by the week if you could deduct something from contract work?
A. Willingly.
Q. Will the Workwomen's Benevolent association permit yon to do it?
A. A large number of operators have said they would be willing to do
it.
Q. Would you be willing to do it?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many hours a day d o those who work by contract generally
work?
A. From six to eight hours.
Q, Do you mean to say you made a contract to pay the men a certain
rate in January in your own colliery, or were you referring to the general
contract between the miners and operators, settling the whole wages of the
region?
A. For the whole region for that month.
Q. The understanding was that if the strike was general you were to pay
at the rate of three dollars, assuming coal to be $3 00?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. If it was not general in the other region's you were to pay at the basis
of $2 50?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What would the strike in the other regions have affected it?
A. Advanced it.
Q. Was there not a strike in the Upper Wyoming regions in December?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. In fixing the wages the month before, you did it with the knowledge
that if the strike continued coal would be higher, and hence the men enti-
tled to more wages If
A. Yes, sir; it was a special agreement after the suspension had been
ordered by the men and after the strike had occurred in the upper regions.
Q. This was no arrangement made with you for the benefit of your par-
ticular colliery?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you in any way, or by any association, or by any movement of
your own in any way, endeavor to bring about a suspension or stoppage
of work?
A. No, sir.
Q. Was it not agreed that the men should go to work at that arrange-
ment; it was the understanding between myself and you and Mr. Siney, in
Philadelphia, about the fixing of tolls, and when they were to be fixed?
A. The understanding was that if this agreement was carried out, and
if there were no strikes, you would reduce the tolls to a very low point in
the latter part of January.
Q. Did they carry it out?
A. Certainly not; they broke that in December, by insisting upon the
$3 basis; they struck; the conditions upon which you agreed to reduce
the tolls had been broken before the time arrived.
By. Mr. Hall Do you call this an agreement?
[Referring to the paper produced.]
A. It is a proposition.
Q. You say that these miners could make $3' 62 every working day?
A. I say they did make it.
Q. And that at that basis they could make from $70 to $100 a month?
A. Yes, sir.
<pb>
Q. That is on the supposition that they worked steadily every day?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And that they never have any sickness and never stopped for any ac-
cident? ...
A. It is while they work.
Q. Is it not true that no miner anywhere could be under ground that
length of time from week to week all the time?
A. For eight hours—oh, yes, they can work for eight hours.
Q. Would it not be ruinous to their health in your colliery 1
A. No, sir.
Q. This is what a miner could make by working 10 hours a day?
A. From eight to ten.
Q. Can they work ten hours under ground without injuring their health'!
A. I suppose it would alfeot their health. . ..
Q. Have you known any man to do it?
A. I worked myself 20 years in the mines, sometimes 15 hours a day.
digging coal...
Q. How long did you continue at that?
A. Not a great length of time at those hours; I worked for a long time
up to my knees in water and the water falling on me.
Q. What vear was this?
A. From 1839 to 1845.
Q. How many days in a week?: •' .
A. I never lost much time.
Q. Have you not stated that so far as the prevention of crime is con-
cerned the W. B. A. has done a great deal of good?
A. I think it has in a moral point of view.
By Mr. Petrikiu Has it corrected the morals of the men?
-A. Yes, sir; I believe they have controlled a very bad element that ex-
isted in the Schuylkill region before the organization of this association.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. How old are you?
A. Fifty-two.
Q. You worked twenty years as a laborer under ground?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You can punish your breakfast pretty well now? v
A. Yes, sir; it depends some on the quality.
Adjourned until to-morrow afternoon at 2 o'clock.
Harrisburg, March 11, 1811.
Committee met at two P. M. Present—Messrs. Davis, Dechert and
Petrikin.
John E. Rathban, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Where do you live?
A. At Trevorton, Northumberland county.
Q. It is the extreme eastern end of the Northumberland coal regions'!
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You have a colliery there?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many men and boys do you employ f
A. When under full operation about 450.
<pb>
Q. Give us a statement of any stoppages you have had, or any interfer-
ence of your quarry by the W. B. A.; when did the suspension occur in
your region?
A. During September we only worked a portion of the time; our stop-
page occurred on the 8d of October; since then we have done nothing.
Q. Were you ready to work?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Could you have found a market for coal?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Tell us the reasons why you stopped?
A. I took charge of the colliery, by purchase of my partner's interest,
in September, 1869; the rate of wages was then established; I found it
when I went there; I did not seek to change it since that time; since that
time my colliery has run something like seven months, and that is all; I
have never stopped it one day myself.
Q. Was it ever stopped on account of any difficulty of the rate of wages?
Give us a history of these different stoppages and what caused them?
A. The first stoppage which I had occurred in October, 1869; the ques-
tion was the price which I was to pay for gangways in the slope; the slope
was a new work, and the price upon that seemed not to have been fixed;
the price which the committee proposed to put upon it was one which I was
not willing to pay; I therefore proposed to the men that a joint committee
should be appointed to examine the work and put a price upon it; they
agreed to that; I went to Shamokin and requested three operators there or
superintendents of collieries to come and examine the question in connection
with the men and fix a rate; two of them did come, Mr. Reed and Mr. Am-
memam; I offered $9 50 per yard for the gangway; the men demanded
$11; I did not tell any member of the committee what I proposed to pay;
they said the gangway was worth, in their judgment, about $9 50; the
men adhered to the $11, and no settlement was arrived at through the
operation of that committee; the men stuck to $11, and I had to pay it.
Q. How long were you obliged to stop on account of the price in that
gangway?
A. I think about two weeks; I cannot say positively; I had one stop-
page of two weeks, because, on pay-day, my office, which is certainly not
particularly large, was so crowded with men that the clerk said he pro-
posed to pay them out of the window; they took umbrage on that account
for something like two weeks; I stopped for several days upon the demand
that I should discharge my breaker boss.
Q. Did you discharge him?
A. I did not.
Q. What was the consequence?
A. After standing awhile we went to work again.
Q. Your colliery was stopped?
A. Yes, sir; I don't remember exaetly how long; I stopped again for more
than a week upon a question as to the accounts of the wagons at the breaker;
two men claimed that they did not receive pay for as many wagons as they
had sent to the breaker; all the wagons have their tickets when they
come to the breaker; I was satisfied after inquiring that it was not possi-
ble that a mistake could have occurred; one man claimed over twenty
wagons more than he received on his accounts; his name was Isaac Buk-
heizer, who has since been killed at my place.
Q. You did not give him the twenty wagons?
A. We compromised it.
Q. How long was your colliery stopped on that account?
<pb>
A. Something like two weeks, I think; when I went to investigate the
matter to see whether the man was really entitled to the wagons or not,
several of the most prominent members of the organization in our place
told me—
Mr. Hall objected to hear-say evidence.
Mr. Gowen We offer to prove the declarations made by any of the
men working for witness, as to the cause of the suspension, their demands,
&c.
Mr. Hall said he did not object to what the men said they did.
Witness.—It was settled by compromise, after stopping a certain length
of time—I think two weeks; then we went to work again. Another stop-
page, which occurred at my place, was occasioned by putting in the pay
of certain men in a slope. I cannot give the date. We had in the slope
certain miners who were at certain times employing laborers at their so-
licitation, and when their time was put in at the office, it was put in at
laboring prices—$2 00 a day. They demanded that we should pay them
miners' wages. I said I would not do it, because, although they were
miners, and if working at their own work would be entitled to that, still,
for different work, they could only be paid the price we were paying for
that work. I could not convince them that that was fair, and had to pay
them $2 50 a day, after stopping a few days.
Q. You mean the whole colliery stopped?
'A. Oh, yes, the work was stopped; we had a good many other little mat-
ters, and had to stop a day or two. It got so bad that if it looked like
rain, as it did one morning, my drivers would not go out. It did not rain
a drop during the entire day. There was no question about my wages. I
was paying more than anybody in the region, until I saw I could not run
under such circumstances. I had done my he3t to run my colliery every
day. I never stopped it one day myself. It was so expensive to me to
submit to these temporary and frequent stoppages, with all my mules, su-
perintendents and everything, that I made up my mind to run my colliery
myself or stop it. I have not worked for six months.
Q. You say you were either determined to work or stop?
A. I felt that if I must work only six months in the year that I would
quit work altogether, because if I quit for a week or two I have all my ex-
penses, but if I settle down for a stoppage of six months I am cut off
from a great many expenses.
Q. During all these temporary suspensions there is a certain amount
of expense that must go on,- which you must pay, whether you are doing
business or not?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have you any written papers or communications from the W. B. A.?
A. I have a few with me.
Produces two papers.
Q. Who is "Dennis Mullins, secretary?"
A. He is a man who has been working for me.
Q. Is he secretary of the district?
A. He so signs himself.
Q. Who is "John Wright, secretary?"
A. He is also one of my men.
Q. This paper has the seal of the association?
A. I don't know; that is what came to me.
Mr. Gowen—We propese to offer these in evidence.
Q. Who handed you those?
7
<pb>
A. One was handed to me by Dennis Mullins in person; the other was
sent to my office.
Q. Who sent the other?
A. John Wright, secretary.
Mr. Hall objected to the papers being put in evidence, on the ground
that it was not shown that the persons signing them were authorized to
sign any papers of the kind.
Testimony of this witness suspended for the present.
James O. Hallaran, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Where do you live?
A. In Hazleton, Luzerne county.
Q. Do you know who is the principal officer of the W. B. A. in the
Northumberland district?
A. I could not swear to that.
Q. Is there any member of the association here from the Northumber-
land district?
A. Mr. Wright was here yesterday; he went away.
Q. Who is John Wright?
A. I met him at one time as a delegate from Northumberland county.
Q. Do you know that he lives in the Trevorton district?
A. I could not swear; he represented himself as living in Northumber-
land county.
Q. Are you secretary of the Grand Council?
A. No, sir; I am treasurer of the General Council.
Q. Don't you know where John Wright lives?
A. I don't know as to his residence, because I never had occasion to
keep up correspondence with him.
Q. Do you know Mr. Foley?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What position does he hold?
A. I met him as a delegate.
Q. Is he president of the Northumberland county association?
A. I cannot swear to that.
Q. Do you mean you cannot or will not?
A. I don't know.
Q. Is he here?
A. The John Foley that I know from Northumberland county is here?
John Foley, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as follows:
Q. Where do you live?
A. Mt. Carmel, Northumberland county.
Q. Are you connected with the W. B. A.?
A. I am chairman of the executive committee of the association of
Northumberland county.
Q. Do you know John Wright?
A. Yes, sir; he lives at Trevorton.
Q. What position does he occupy in the association?
A. He is delegate to the General Council; I don't know whether he oc-
cupies any other position in the association or not.
Q. Don't you know that he is secretary of the district?
A. I do not; I have not received any communications from him.
Q. What books would show who are the officers of the different districts?
<pb>
A. The district book of the Trevorton district would show the officers
of that district.
Q. How many districts have you in Northumberland county 1
A. Six—Trevorton, Shamokin, Coal Ridge, Locust Gap, Mt. Carmel.
Q. What is the number of the Trevorton district?
A. Number five.
Q. You don't know whether John Wright is the secretary of that associa-
tion or not y
A. I do not.
Q. Who has the custody of the seals of the different branches or districts?
A. The president of the district generally keeps the seal.
Q. Who is president of the Trevorton district?
A. I don't know.
Q. Do you know who is the president of the district you live in?
A. Yes, sir; William Jones.
Q. Who is president of the Shamokin district?
A. I don't know.
Q. Who is the custodian of the books of the different districts?
A. The secretary generally has the control or the keeping of the books.
Q. What general book is there that will contain the names of the officers
of the different districts?
A. No book that I am aware of.
Q. How does the secretary of the association know who to correspond
with?
A. Every district elects a delegate to meet the Executive board, and if
there is corresponding to be carried on between the districts they corres-
pond with those delegates.
Q. Where are the general books of the association kept—I mean of the
entire association?
A. The books of the entire association of the anthracite coal fields are
kept somewhere in Luzerne county; Mr. Reese is the secretary.
Q. Each district has its separate books, and those books are in the cus-
tody of the secretary of those districts, and those books would show who
those officers are? . .
A. Yes^ sir.
Mr. Gowen offered in evidence the two papers produced by the witness
Rathbun.
Objected to by Mr. Hall, unless the seal was authenticated.
Admitted if connected with the association and shown to be issued by
their authority.
John E. Rathbun re-called by Mr. Gowen.
Q. State whether during the suspension you employed any men, and what
for?
A. After we stopped, in October, I found that the gang-way of the water
level drift had settled, thereby carrying the water down into the slope; I
had a sixteen-inch pump on the ground, and I could not get anybody to do
any thing, except my bosses, blacksmith, &c.; we worked at it in October
and did put it in. Since then I have employed nobody, except the stable
boss and engineers engaged in pumping.
Q. If you had not employed these men for the purposes named what
would have been the result 1
A. I would have lost my slope, with 30,000 tons of coal in it.
Q. What has it cost to open that slope?
<pb>
A. Outside of the machinery, the slope itself and its contents are worth
$10,000.
Q. That would have been lost unless you would have taken the water out?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What were you paying your men last year when you worked?
A. On the basis of 1869.
Q. What wages did a good miner earn?
A. My men earned in August, 1870, including all men who worked,
without reference to the number of days, an average of $3 93.
Q. All your men or the miners?
A. The contract miners; their wages run from about $60 to $227 50 per
month; a good many earned over $150.
Q. What were you paying laborers?
A. The general rate was $11 outside and $12 inside.
Q. Had you any conversation with any of your men as to the cause of
this—whether it referred to obnoxious men?
A. I had a meeting with my committee on Tuesday evening.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Were these the men that caused the suspension?
A. I cannot say; I sent for them as being leading men; Mark Moran
was one of the party; he was the president of Our district; Thomas Gil-
lespie was another, and Jenkin Jones; I stated to them that I was de-
sirous of commencing the repairs at my colliery; I proposed if we worked
to pay them the basis of 1869, in day's wages, or to contract it if we could
mutually agree; I proposed also to employ, if we worked, only union men
except my bosses; I mean of the W. B. A.; but I reserved the right to
employ such union men as I might see proper; I asked them what objec-
tion they had to the men going to work upon those terms; the answer was
that if I, myself, bossed the work the terms were satisfactory', and that
they would undertake them and commence the next day, but that no man
belonging to the association would work there for me under my present
bosses; that was exactly what was said.
Q. Have you commenced work?
A. No, sir.
By Mr. Hall Q. Do you hold that these men were obliged to work un-
less they wanted to?
A. That is rather a difficult question to answer; in a moral, legal point
of view every man should properly control himself, but when they take po-
sitions, and where it is a public organization, and they occupy positions
that others cannot go in, then I say they have not the right.
Q. Do you mean that it was of public importance that you should carri-
on your business and make money?
A. As a part of the whole I do consider it a matter of public impor-
tance.
Q. That you should make money?
A. But that my collieries should run.
Q. Would you want your collieries to run if you lost money?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you quit business six months ago because you were not making
money?
A. No, sir; I could not make money by running the colliery half the
time; I could have made money by running every day.
Q. Had not those men a right to quit if they pleased?
A. I have answered that.
Q. And was not the only penalty that would follow the fact that they
would net get pay?
<pb>
A. Yes, sir,
Q. Is there any way to punish these men for not working except not
to pay them?
A. Yes, sir; there is a moral penalty; for instance, if I owned. person-
ally, all the collieries in Pennsylvania, in the anthracite coal fields, and at
a mere whim of mine, I choose to stop those collieries, I would have a right
to do so and let them lie idle; but when an action of that kind, without
sufficient reason, causes distress to others, then I am responsible.
Q. If you choose to go out of business and do not choose to run your
colliery, you are responsible to the number of men who have been working
there before?
A. If my colliery is of sufficient importance to make any one suffer.
Q. And that is the moral law?
A. I should judge so.
Q. You know of no reason, other than you have given, why these men
had not a right to quit work when they did, in your particular case?
A. I cannot say anything further about their rights; they had no reason
for it.
Q. Are you the judge of these men?
A. No, sir; my business depends upon them.
Q. Haven't you the right to get other men?
A. Theoretically I have; practically it is impossible.
Q. Why is it impossible?
A. Simply because there is sueh a system of terrorism that you cannot
get any men to work except under the rules of the organization.
Q. How much money did you make in August?
A. I believe that the net income of my colliery—the difference between
what I paid out and what I got for 013- coal—was some $1,300.
Q. How many men and boys had you working?
A. I had, when in full operation, about 450.
Q. How many of them earned over $100 per month!'
A. I presume that from 60 to 70 were in position to earn more than that.
Q. Repeated?
A. Probably 40 or 50.
Q. How many of these 40 or 50 were what you call bosses?
A. None.
Q. How many of these persons earned $11 a week?
A. I could not possibly tell you; we have, I should think, perhaps 20 or
25 outside laborers.
Q. How many earned $12?
■A. That is the lowest price we paid; we have inside labor which we pay
a high price for; we paid as high as $18.
Q. How many earned $12?
A. I should judge from 20 to 25.
Q. And the others earned how much?
A. We have four men that we pay $3 a day to; they are runners; there
are a great many miners that don't earn this, $100; to earn that a man must
work some.
Q. A nd must be a very good workman?
A. No, sir; because we have some that earn over $200; I have 90 boys in
the breaker, the oldest probably 11 or 12; they range from $4 to as high
as $7 50 a week.
Q. What about the rest?
A. They are distributed around amongst the miners who don't make $100
a month.
.'
<pb>
Q. How much did they make during that month?
A. The lowest made $60; the highest made $227 50.
Q. There is still a large number of the 450 left?
A. Those would be partly miners who don't make this $100 a month, and
my bosses, clerks, carpenters, blacksmiths, drivers, &c.
Q. Can you furnish me the pay-roll for the month of August?
A. I will send it to you on my return.
Q. Was there not a percentage paid over the basis in 1869, of 18 per cent.?
A. I don't recollect the exact amount; we paid over the basis.
Q. These wages that you say the boys and men got, was that in 1869?
A. In 1870.
Q. What did they get in '69?
A. T cannot tell you without the books.
Q. What would you have paid these men that got $11 a week, if the
basis had been $2 50?
A. My figures would be the same as Mr. Kendricks.
Q. Your complaint is that you have capital invested, and your works
have not been running the length of time they should run?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You complain of somebody else because you have not been fortunate?
A. No, I don't particularly complain; I say the reason I have not run
more is not because I desire to stop my colliery; the reason I have not run
is because my men would not work.
Q. Do you complain I
A. If that is a complaint then I complain.
Q. Where did these men buy the necessaries of life?
A. I cannot tell you; a portion of them bought from my store; I had,
up to October, 1870, a store of my own.
Q. How long did you run in October, 1870?
A. Not at all.
Q. Then you had all the time you were running a store of your own, and
sold these men the articles?
A. Whenever they choose to come.
Q. What did you get for flour during the time that these men got $11 a
week 1
A. About $6 50 a barrel, to the best of my recollection.
Q. What was the price of ham?
A. I think about from 16 to 18 cents.
Q. The necessaries of life were dear then?
A. No, sir; not so dear as they had been.
Q. How much more did you charge these men than what they could have
got them for at the stores in the adjoining town?
A. Not one cent, to my knowledge.
Q. How about powder—do they pay for that?
A. Yes, sir; we deduct it from their wages.
Q. How much would that reduce the miners' wages?
A. It would depend upon the amount of work; a man earning $100
would burn four kegs of powder, at $3 50, making $14.
Q. How much oil?
A. I suppose one gallon a month; that would be $1 50.
Q. You take off $15 50?
A. No, sir; these statements of prices which I give you are net after all
his items are deducted.
Q. Your pay roll will tell me how much was taken off for these things?
A. Yes, sir; and for all the other things that enter into our account.
<pb>
Q. Don't they sometimes buy the oil and powder at other places?
A. They get their oil at Trevorton; the men there have a co-operative
store; not half of the men dealt at the store in which I was interested, be-
cause they had been accustomed to deal elsewhere; my instructions to the
clerks were to sell as cheap as anybody; when parties deal at our store
who are working for us we have the account and deduct what is due the store.
Q. Will the paper you are going to send me show the hours they worked?
A. It is impossible to say how much the men on contract worked; I can
give you the statement of my bosses; I can say this, that my men are go-
ing home all the way from one to six o'clock.
Q. We can get the number of weeks?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Are not the tickets sometimes lost from the wagons after they leave
the mines?
A. They are sometimes lost and sometimes stolen.
Q. Was not that what the trouble was about?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you offer to reduce the price of contract work at the time you
took possession of the colliery?
A. No, sir.
Q. What was your basis in "70?
A. The $3 basis.
Q. Were the Schuylkill men working then?
A. A part of the time.
Q. In October, before you suspended generally, you wanted to reduce
the contract work 20 per cent.?
A. No, sir.
Q. Are there any collieries in your neighborhood working now?
A. I cannot tell you.
Q. Don't you know that there are collieries working there now that send
coal over the Northern Central?
A. I do not know of but one; I do not know which way the coal goes.
Q. Are there not collieries in your neighborhood now working that send
coal over the Northern Central that used to send it over the Reading?
A. It is possible, but I don't know that such is the case.
Q. Is the Langdon colliery at work?
A. Not to my knowledge; I live ten miles from there.
Q. Have you been at Shamokin?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Were you at the Philadelphia meeting 7
A. I was at a meeting; I was at a meeting held something like five weeks
ago.
Q. What did they do?
A. Appointed a delegate to attend to certain business.
Q. What was the certain business?
A. I hardly know.
Q. What did they do?
A. The result was to appoint a delegate to confer with other parties in
the same interest.
Q. Who were the other parties?
A. I do not know.
Q. Was it the railroads?
A. I presume, from what I heard, they were to be parties.
Q. Mr. Borda acted as your agent and the agent of these operators, and
was appointed for that purpose?
<pb>
A. I hardly think'it could be so considered; he ha'd no discretion to act;
he was to hear.
Q. He was authorized to do certain things?
A. Not to my knowledge.
Q. Just to go and see and hear, and not to say a word?
A. I believe so.
Q. Did he ever report?
A. I believe so.
Q. Was there a meeting subsequently called at which a report was made?
A. I have heard so; I was not at the meeting.
Q. Do you know that Dennis Mullin is the secretary of the W. B. A.?
A. I do not.
Q. Do you know John Wright?
A. I do not.
Q. Do you know that this is the seal of their association?
A. No, sir.
By Mr. Gowen Q. You stated you made $1,300 in August—did that in-
clude the interest on your investment?
A. No; I charged simply what I gave out and what I took in.
Q. How much did you lose a month during this temporary suspension?
A. I suppose it costs now about $1,000 a month to feed the mules and
do the pumping.
By Mr. Hall Q. Would it not be good policy to sell those mules?
A. Probably it would; but it is hard to get good mules.
Q. If you quit work with 50 mules on hand, and choose to keep and feed
them, do you think anybody else ought to be charged with that folly but
yourself?
A. I have not charged them.
Q. Did you direct Borda to make an arrangement or proposition to the
Delaware and Western road?
A. I think not.
Q. Or any other road?
A. I think not.
Q. Was there any agreement made between the men and operators for
1871 in Northumberland county?
A. I have understood so; I was not present at any such meeting nor a
party to any such agreement.
Q. Have you heard any operators say so who is here?
A. I do not know whether they are here or not.
Q. [Paper shown witness.] Please look at that paper and say whether
the operators told you they made that bargain?
A. Yes, sir; I understand that is the text of the agreement that was made.
[Offered in evidence and marked Ex. "C." The paper purports to be an
agreement between the operators and men of the Northumberland region,
by which the operators agreed to pay the $3 00 basis.]
A. M. Eastwick, called by Mr. Gowen. being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. You are engaged in the coal business, are you?
A. I am president of the Burnside coal and iron company, located at
Shamokin; we have one colliery, known as the Luke Filler colliery; we
employ, at various times, 1,500 men; I suppose we will continue to em-
ploy this summer about 300 or 400; that includes boys; the colliery is
now prepared for about 10,000 tons a month.
Q. Who is your superintendent?
<pb>
A. William Sharpe.
Q. Tell your manner of working there and if any interference has been
made on the part of the men—any threats or anything connected with the
stoppage of work?
A. I have been acting perfectly independent of the W. B. A. for the past
year, and generally acknowledge them as having no powers over me, or
ever will. In 1869 there was a suspension and the collieries were all idle
for several months. In the month of June I went to Shaniokin for the
purpose of seeing what could be done to help matters; I talked with the
men; they seemed to be very reasonable; I concluded they should go to
work; my effort was to get the entire region at work; Schuylkill had
started; we got them together and there was a fair understanding; I stated
to the men that I was willing they should sell their labor for the highest
price they could get; I wished them to act perfectly independent and I
should do the same; I agreed to their basis and complied with all their
wishes; during the year they threw many obstacles in my way contrary to
the agreement; I worked during 1869 at a loss; in November I gave orders
to stop the gangways for the purpose of getting clear of some of the lead-
ers who were the disturbers of the colliery; I gave orders to discharge all
hands; in January, 1870, we worked part of the month; several persons
desired to come back; one of \he disturbing elements in our place was a
man by the name of Munday, a blacksmith—a very impertinent; the W. 13.
A. know him; at all events Mr. Munday did not suit me and I discharged
him ;. a committee waited upon me immediately to know why I discharged
Mr. Munday; I gave them as my reason that he did not suit me; I was
told by the committee that that would not answer their purposes—I must
give a definite reason and state the causes; I declined; they left and went
to the colliery and ordered the stoppage of the whole work; I went to the
colliery to ascertain the facts and found it was so; I then requested the
inside boss to collect a few of the men and send them to my office, so as
to ascertain the cause; they came and said they were desirous of working,
but the orders were to quit; I asked by whom; they answered: "The
orders are that we must quit; we may work if we see proper, but we know
the consequences; we dare not work;" while we were conversing with
those men, one of this committee that waited upon me to ascertain why I
discharged Mr. Munday, came in and asked: "What are these men doing
here?"
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Were they members of the W. B. A.?
A. They called themselves such; they told me frequently they were;
they wanted to know why I had those men in my office; I told them that
was my private business, and they had no right to come there; this man
said: "I adjourn this meeting—go out;" I had him arrested; you will find
his record in the court of Northumberland county; the man got up and
walked out of the place; I ordered him out of the place; I went to Sun-
bury that day and had a warrant for those men and had them arrested and
bound over, and had other men engaged to work in my colliery, where I
could find independent men to work; it was not long before I placed a
watchman around the colliery; on the 4th of March a gang came around
at midnight and fired into the house, killing one of the men I had; this
was in 1870; this caused me to act independently and not have any asso-
ciation direct me in my affairs; after the death of this man we telegraphed
for assistance, finding that things were getting desperate; the answer was:
"Exhaust your local authorities;" we concluded the local authorities had
been exhausted; I then engaged five extra watchmen to put on the place;
we sent to the Governor to commission extra men, which I would pay for,
<pb>
and he did so; he commissioned two policemen, under the seal of the State,
and I kept them there; these men were a protection; the men, finding they
could be protected, came in; but I was obliged to arm them all; every
man had a pistol, and the watchmen had rifles; that was the manner in
which I had to conduct my business last year. I am termed in that region
a " black leg "—that means those who don't belong to the union; those
who do not belong to the W. B. A. are termed black legs. This was during
the entire year of 1870. Coal became low; I was about to stop the colliery
in December, 1870, as it would not pay at the wages that were being paid;
the men who had stood by me during the entire summer requested me to
go on with the work, and for their sakes I continued, and paid them, while
I was losiDg money on the sale of coal; when the order for suspension
took place, on the tenth of January, not a man left it; about a week after-
wards a gang of men came around and fired into the houses in the village;
I was there at the time; in the morning I called the men together and told
them there was nothing to be made in the colliery; I did not wish to en-
danger their lives; I was obliged to repair my breaker, and I suspended
them all; but they are ready to go to work at any time as independent men.
By Mr. Gowen Q. How much money has been invested in the improve-
ments you have control of and in the land you own?
A. I have been operating upon those lands'for the last ten years; I sup-
pose I have expended over $200,000 in the operation; my land and all
concerned, is worth about $500,000; there are about 600 acres of land; I
have owned that about 15 years.
Q. As the manager of a colliery and the owner of land, I wish you to
state whether or not it is of importance that the colliery should work con-
tinually, and state the effect of these constant suspensions?
A. It is important to work continually if we wish to realize anything
out of our investment; to work at intervals we loose one month what we
gained the former; therefore, it is necessary to work a colliery at the fullest
capacity.
Q. You have worked at a loss?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. Tell us in relation to the destruction of any
ventilating apparatus of yours?
A. In July last year they attacked my engineer in the night; he heard
them and fled from the engine house; he heard the remarks they made, and
thought he was to be attacked; he got out and gave notice to the police;
by the time the police got there they had torn the engine to pieces, and
carried parts of it away; the men were at work at that time.
Q. This engine was the one that turned the fan?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. That fan was necessary for the protection of the men?
A. It was placed there according to law, to ventilate the mines. I also
commenced to drive a shaft, to get another air-hole to the men, and they
all quit it; they said they dared not work; I was obliged to stop it and
commence underneath and work up, at great expense. Subsequent to the
tearing to pieces of the engine, on a Sunday afternoon, when the watchman
was away, they set fire to the engine house, and destroyed the engine and
fan, and all that was there. However, they did not stop me long; I got
ventilation in a few days; so that during the entire year I was at great
expense to work an independent collie^. Any man has a right to sell his
labor for what he can get, and I have a right to pay what I can. I will
have no committee making a price; I found the men perfectly willing to
work, and I have paid them good wages.
<pb>
Q. Can you tell us what wages a good miner has been able to earn in a
day at your mines?
A. No, sir; that is a matter I cannot enter into. ♦
Q. Is your superintendent here?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. What was the name of the man that was killed?
A. James Buchanan.
Q. Where was he killed and when?
A. On the 4th of March, 1870, in the engine house attached to the breaker.
Q. Do you not know that that was before the W. B. A. was incorporated?
A. I know nothing about their incorporation.
Q. Do you say that the W. B. A., or any one of them, was connected
with the shooting?
A. I do not say who shot them; I have my suspicions; I believe some
of them are out of the world now.
Q. Do you remember the fact that a man by the name of Rea was killed
up there?
A. I remember it.
Q. Do you not remember that Pat Hayes was charged with his murder
and tried in Columbia county and acquitted?
A. I do not know; I never read criminal cases.
Q. Do you know who committed these deeds that you talk about?
A. I don't know any thing about it; I have made no charge against any
one and do not now.
Q. Have not these crimes become less frequent since the organization of
the W. B. A.?
A. No, sir; in our region they have become more frequent.
Q. What crime has been committed since the incorporation of this asso-
ciation?
A. George Hoffman, one of the independent men that worked for me,
was killed.
Q. When was that?
A. On the 4th of March, 1871.
Q. Don't you know that this association has offered a reward for the
murderer of George Hoffman?
A. I have heard it and read the account some where; I think it was in
the Monitor.
Q. Do you know that any body connected with the W. B. A. had any
thing to do with this crime that took off George Hoffman?
A. I have no knowledge; no man can tell, when there is a gang of men
out at the dead hour of night.
Q. Did you ever know of gangs of men going around shooting before
this association was organized, outside of this case of James Buchanan?
A. Not personally; merely from rumor.
Q. Don't you know it was frequent?
A. I do not.
Q. What wages did you pay your men in 1870?
A. I decline to give that; that is my private business; you nor any other
man has a right to inquire about my private business.
[The witness was required to answer.]
Q. Please tell me what wages you paid your men?
A'. I don't keep the accounts of the colliery and cannot tell you.
Q. You told me you would not tell because I had no right to inquire into
your private business?
A. I did not tell you I paid any thing.
<pb>
Q. Tell us what you paid as near as you can?
A. I cannot tell.
Q. Tell us*what you paid outside laborers?
A. I do not know; you can get that information from the superintendent.
Q. Tell me what 3'ou paid inside laborers?
A. I do not know.
Q. Nor miners?
A. No, sir.
Q. What is your superintendent's name?
A. "William Sharpe; he is here.
George B. Markle, called by M. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Where do you live?
A. Hazleton, Luzerne county, in the Lehigh region.
Q. What is your business?
. A. Coal operator.
Q. Of the firm of George B. Markle & Co., at Jeddo?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How much did you ship in 1870?
A. 342,000 tons; a portion of it goes over the Lehigh Valley and Lehigh
Navigation canal.
Q. When did the present suspension occur in your region?
A. January 10, 1871.
Q. Was there at that time any difficulty between you and your men upon
the subject of wages?
A. None whatever.
Q. Tell us what you know about any suspensions or annoyances in your
collieries by the acts of the workingmen?
A. In the first place, on the 30th of June, 1869,I entered into a contract
with my men; the contract was signed by eight (8) of my men as a com-
mittee; they represented themselves to me as members of the W. B. A.;
this paper has their seal. I asked them if that was the seal of the associa-
tion.
[Agreement offered in'evidence. Objected to by Mr. Hall, unless it was
authenticated. Admitted if connected with these men. The following is
the agreement:]
Jeddo, June 30, 1869.
That is to have 60 cents per ton on Oakdale and Jeddo slopes. When
coal is selling at $5 00 per ton at Port Johnson or Elizabethport our slid-
ing scale shall be 12^ per cent. on the ton price for every dollar that coal
advances at the above named places, and the reduction of coal, in the same
proportion.
(Signed) THOMAS E. MORPETH,
CHAS. EDWARDS,
P. ROGAN,
CHAS. A. JOHNSON,
ALEX. DUYER,
THOS. A. BUCKLEY,
GEO. TURNER,
NEAL X M'GINLEY.
mark.
G. B. Markle & Co.
M. & L. association of the A. C. F. & C, local Jeddo district, No. 23.
<pb>
Witness—I settled with my men at those rates, and the men struck and
refused to settle in that way, because, they said, other mines were paying
their men, when coal advanced one dollar at Elizabethport, ten cents per
ton; the consequence was, I had to accede to their demands or allow my
collieries to remain idle.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. The men represented themselves as a committee?
A. I supposed I was dealing with members of the W. B. A.; they rep-
resented themselves to me as such.
Q. What did they say with reference to the seal?
A. They said it was their district seal; I have some papers with the dis-
trict seal on; we worked on that contract a short time, and I complained to
the men that I could not stand their violation of it, and our work stopped; I
I told them that I would be compelled to carry out that contract. We re-
mained idle about a month and a half or two months, when we drew up
another contract; we were idle several times during 1869, and this con-
tract was drawn up on the 10th of November, 1869; it is a contract simi-
lar to the other.
[Agreement offered in evidence.]
Mr. Hall—If the gentleman proposes to connect this with the W. B. A.
we do not object.
Mr. Gowen—We propose to do so.
Witness—This is the agreement that I made on the 10th of November,
1869, with our men, and the agreement they have been working under ever
since.
Agreement read as follows:
The basis received by miners shall be sixty cents per ton, in the Buck
Mount vein, when the average price of lump, broken, egg, stove and chest-
nut coal at Port Johnson shall be $5 per ton, and in addition thereto they
shall receive ten cents per ton on each dollar that the price of coal ad-
vances, and reduce the same on each dollar that coal recedes in said mar-
ket.
Witness our signatures this 10th day of November, 1869.
(Signed) " THOS. A. BUCKLY,
ALEX. STEWART,
GEO. TURNER,
E. C. MYERS,
G. B. MARKLE & CO.
November 11, 1869, we, the undersigned, acknowledge the erasure of
article twelve to be correct.
Witness—When I had my notice of suspension this year I wanted to
know of the men who waited upon me how they could violate this con-
tract; my contract did not specify that they could stop when it went be-
low $5; the reply was that they had received an order from the Grand
Council of the W. B. A., and that it did not make any diffeience what price
I paid them, they were going to stop; I have another similar contract;
my mines are divided into two branches; this is the branch where I have
three collieries; this is signed by three (3) men. and reads as follows:
That no member of this association shall disturb, molest and interfere
with any person who does not belong to their association, nor interfere in
any way with the management of the mines.
Witness our hands this 11th day of November, 1869.
(Signed) NEAL P. JOHNSON,
Stamp WILLIAM BRADLEY,
10 cents. RICHARD BENFIELD.
G. B. Mabkle & Co.
<pb>
•
[Offered in evidence.]
Objected to by Mr. Hall.
Admitted, if connected with the association.
Witness—That clause was violated, I think, every week that I worked
last year; I will read a lot of notices that came under the same head as
the other papers, notifying me on different subjects; I received them from
the men.
Objected to.
Admitted under same conditions.
Witness—Here is a paper, dated May 1, 1869; I received it from our
workingmen:
Jeddo, May 1, 1869.
Mr. G. B. Markle & Co.:
Sir :—We, the miners and laborers of Jeddo, do hereby notify you that
there will be a general suspension of mining in the anthracite coal regions
of Pennsylvania, to commence on Monday, May the 10th, 1869; and more-
over, that we intend to take part in the movement, believing that it will be
to our benefit to do 60; we hereby notify you that we will not mine nor load
any coal whatever after the 8th day of May, 1869, until said suspension is
over.
(Signed) The Miners and Laborers op Jeddo, Pa.
Witness—I can give the names of the men who handed that paper to me;
I have another similar paper here.
Jeddo, August 7, 1869.
To Mr. Q. B. Markle:
Sir:—Your workingmen respectfully inform you that they intend to
stand by their basis, and they request you to take their laborers' time to-
day, the *lth of August; and they request you to pay on the 15th of this
month or work will be suspended.
A. REESE, President.
(For the men,) T. E. MORPETH, Secretary.
Witness—I have got some that are signed by the men.
Q. Tell us who handed those papers to you that have no signatures?
A. They were handed to me by the reputed secretary of the W. B. A.
at our place; his name is Thomas Morpeth, one of my workmen; he told
me he was the secretary. Here are other notices that I received:
Jeddo, May 4, 1869.
To Geo. B. Markle & Co.:
1st Resolved, That we demand an advance of thirty-five cents on the car,
from the 1st of May, 1869, to bring us on a level with the other collieries
in this valley.
2d Resolved, That the demand is to be paid on the 15th of May, 1869.
3d Resolved, That we demand to have the Dupont powder at $4 00 per
keg, or we will buy our own powder.
4th Resolved, That we will not allow any strangers to work here in Jeddo
until the men that is here are all employed.
blh Resolved, If those notices is not complied with we will not resume
work after the suspension until they are complied with.
(Signed] THE WORKINGMEN OF JEDDO.
<pb>
Jbddo, August 14, 1869.
To G. B. Markle:
This is to notify you that the men cannot accept your terms as specified
in your notice to the men, and it was
Resolved, That each and every man who belongs to the Workingmen's B.
A. suspend work after the 15th of this month.
T. B. MORPETH, Secretary.
A. REESE, President.
Jeddo, November 30, 1870.
To G. B. Markle, Esq.:
Dear Sir :—At a special meeting of Jeddo branch, held on the above
date, the Pink Ash question was brought up and discussed; when it was
Resolved, That they will not allow any more footage upon any account;
and it was further Resolved, That if the Pink Ash slope stop on account
of the tonnage the rest of the slopes will stop also.
NEAL P. JOHNSON, President.
Jeddo, Luzerne County, Pa., January 7, 1870.
Geo. B. Markle, Esq.:
Sir:—At a stated meeting of the W. B. A., held the 7th ult., the lease
question was brought up and discussed; many and various objections were
presented in reference to the said lease. The men finally decided to make
you a proposition, in this wise:
The workingmen of Jeddo agree to appoint a committee of two men, to
meet two men appointed by G. B. Markle, for the purpose of drawing up a
lease; the said committee to consist of one private and one professional
man of the first and second part, and the said form of lease to be strictly
in conformity with the State law; the said form to be submitted to the
branch for examination before signing.
You will please appoint your men and name the time and place of meet-
ing, so as the branch can act likewise.
We remain your humble servants,
A. REESE, President.
ENOCH P. EVANS, Vice President.
"Witness—I had a lease signed with my men which gave me the power
to move a man out of a house within two weeks; we frequently have cases
when we have discharged men and we had no control over our houses;
they would go to an adjoining colliery and work as long as they had a
mind to; we got up a lease whereby we were able to control our own pro-
perty, and the men objected to it; some of them presented petitions to
have their names taken off; here is one of them:
Highland, May 21, 1870.
Mr. G. B. Markle & Co:
Sir:—We, the undersigned, occupants of houses at Highland, and hav-
ing signed the ten day lease for said houses, we therefore request you to
Withdraw our names from said ten days' lease, or otherwise put its contents
in force by dispossessing us of said houses, according to its statements and
specifications, or we, the undersigned, will consider ourselves free from the
impositions and contents of said lease at the expiration of thirty days
from this date. Signed as follows
(Signed by) ALFRED GREEN,
WILLIAM JOHNSON
JAMES LEWIS,
and twenty-four others
<pb>
Q. Were those men employed by you 1 . .
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And occupied houses of yours?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. You had the right to throw them out in mid-winter at
ten days' notice, and they wanted more than ten days?
A. Yes, sir; we objected to it, but we defied them to show an instance
where we threw a man out of our house.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. In the event of the discharge of your men you
wanted to get possession of your houses?
A. Yes, sir. Here is a notice with two seals.
Jeddo, Luzerne co., Pa., April 1G, 1870.
Geo. B. Markle, Esq.:
Dear Sir:—This is to notify you that at the expiration of six days
from date the workingmen of Jeddo, under your employ, shall suspend
work until such time that there is a satisfactory lease drawn between you
and us, and signed by us, each party holding a copy of the same.
Very respectfully yours,
ENOCH P. EVANS, President.
M. & L. association of the A. G. F. of L. co., Pa., Jeddo district, No. 23.
Jeddo branch No. 1, W. B. A., Luzerne co., Pa.
Here is a notice of suspension, dated March 1, 1870.
Jeddo, Luzhrne Co., Pa., March 1, 1870.
To Geo. B. Markle:
Dear Sir :—You are hereby notified that we, the workingmen of Jeddo,
under the employ of G. B. Markle & Co., shall, at the expiration of six
days from date, suspend work, which will be on the 7th inst.
Yours respectfully,
ENOCH P. EVANS, President.
Here is another notice:
Jeddo, June 13, 1870.
G. B. Markle, Esq.:
Dear Sir :—At a special meeting of the W. B. A., of Jeddo, the fol-
lowing resolutions were unanimously passed:
Besolved, That we will suspend work June 14th, until Mr. Markle shall
have gotten a legal lease, and we will sign no lease but a legal lease, in
conformity with the State law; and be it further
Resolved, That we get our goods on the first of the month, and our pay
on the 15th, as other places and other men. Said payments to be made in
full.
ENOCH P. EVANS, President.
T. E. MORPETH, Secretary.
I had agreed to pay my men from the 15th to the 20th. Here is another:
NOTICE.
Jeddo, August 13, 1869.
There will be a special meeting of the Jeddo branch of the W. B. A.
held in the Jeddo school house to-morrow, Saturday afternoon, at two
<pb>
o'clock. Every member is requested to be present, as there will be busi-
ness of the utmost importance (to every man working about the mines) to
transact. Any member who does not attend will be fined, according to the
rules of the society. Let the work stand if necessary.
By order of the president.
A. REESE.
T. E. MORPETH, Secretary.
That was put on our store door by Thomas Morpeth; I know that posi-
tively; here is one dated February 2, 1870:
Highland, February 2, 1870.
Mr. G. B. Markle:
We, the breast-men of Highland, request the gangway men and the open-
ing-out men to lay idle with the breast men; they get the empty cars which
is left empty. The breast-men want to stop it.
JOHN BURTON,
EDWARD MYERS,
FRANK WARNICK.
We drive our gangways at night, so as to get ahead. Here is one in re-
gard to the eight (8) hour system:
Highland, March 1, 1870.
Mr. G. B. Markle & Co.:
Sirs:—You are hereby duly notified that the members of the Highland
Branch of the W. B. A., will suspend work on Monday, March 7, 1870,
unless the decision of the region mass meeting is to the contrary.
Yours respectfully,
THOMAS A. BUCKLEY,
GEORGE TURNER,
EDWARD MYERS,
ALEX. STEWART.
As the Scranton region did not go into it we only suspended a week-
I received the following notice from the president of the Branch:
Highland, December 9, 1870.
Mr. G. B. Markle:
Dear Sir:—I have been requested by the members of the Highland
Branch of the M. & L. B. A., to communicate to you a resolution that
was passed in the above named Branch, concerning you calling men from
their work. It was
Resolved, That when Mr. Markle sends for any person from this Branch.
and they lose their day's work, that the company pays the person called
on, as the Branch declines paying any more. If anything of importance
you want to lay before the men, if you please to note it on paper, and
send it to me, I will attend to it with all promptness, and any answer you
may wish to get I will send without any delay, and may save a little ani-
mosity among our men here.
Yours respectfully,
CHARLES S. BOYLE,-President.
I have another paper here that caused considerable trouble; I had a
man by the name of John M'Grogh, who drank a great deal and who was
getting into trouble with his neighbors; I have had the neighbors come to
8
<pb>
me and complain of him, and want him discharged. I was sitting in the
office one day when this man came out of the hotel with a bottle in h>s
hand; they came down and reported that he had stolen a bottle of mineral
water. I discharged the man, and here is the notice I received:
Jeddo, December 10, 1869.
Mr. G. B. Markle:
Sir :—You are hereby notified that we, the workingmen of this place,
do not consider that you have any just reasons for discharge John M'-
Grogh from his work; he has broken no rule connected with your works,
neither has he used any abusive language to you or to any of your fore-
men, nor has he in any manner interfered with your business; therefore,
we request that John M'Grogh be restored to his work, and you are hereby
notified that if this request is not complied within six days from this date,
Friday, December the tenth, (10,) 1869, we, the balance of the men, now
working under you, will suspend work on the seventh day, (Thursday,)
December the 16, 1869.
Yours very respectfully,
Workingmen of Jeddo, Pa.
This case was carried before the district meeting, and I met the men
there and endeavored to explain; we got the matter amicably settled. At
one of our slopes during 1870, we paid for 2,080 tons to a man that were
not mined. I spoke to the president, and proposed to stop that, and re-
ceived a reply objecting to it; I paid on rather than be stopped. We
stopped work on March 2, 1870, and went to work March 9th; that was an
order the men [stated issued from the Grand Council. May 17, 1870, we
stopped work, and went to work on the 24th—the men stating that there
■was a misunderstanding. June 14th our men struck on the lease question—
some of them; they stopped but one day. August 12th the men stopped
because the miners refused to go down before seven o'clock to work. When
I got a copy of the ventilation bill I put up a notice that the miners should
be into the works before seven in the morning, because we were not al-
lowed to have them pass up and down when coal was passing. The men
came there that morning about half past seven or eight o'clock, and would
not walk down into the mines; we could not allow them to ride down under
the bill; they sent down to the men already in and ordered a stoppage.
Q. Under the act of 1870 you are not permitted to have the men ride
clown, and because you wanted to enforce the act of 1870 there was a strike?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Were there any other interferences or dictations made by the men?
A. I do not think that I spent six weeks during 1870 without having a
committee wait upon me for something.
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. Did they stop because they were required to walk
down the slope?
A. Yes. sir; they stopped one day; they submitted to it the next day
and went to work.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. Are there any other acts of interference on the
part of the men employed by you that you have now to speak of?
A. They have frequently set prices on work that we knew nothing of,
and in case we did not accede to their terms they would stop. In the early
part of July, 1870, 1 went away; before going I called some of the prin-
cipal men together and told them I expected to be gone some thirty days,
and wanted to know if there were any difficulties unsettled; I did not want
a stoppage in my business when I was away; they said there was none and
<pb>
should be no stoppage while I was gone; I had not been gone two weeks
when my men stopped, on the question of payment; they wanted payment
earlier than we had been in the habit of paying; they only stopped one
day; the clerk started to pay the men before he had the books balanced,
and succeeded in satisfying them; and when I returned home I called in
our president and talked to him about it, and he said there were so many
ignorant men among them that they could not be controlled.
Q. State what wages were made by the miners at your works during 1870?
A. Under the first contract, in 1869, we had men making from $300 to
$700 per month; under our contract of 1870 I took off 30 names, not se-
lected, and those 30 men had made an average of $5 58 a day; these were
miners working by contract; they paid their laborers $13 20 per week in-
side; that is under the contract of 1869, which carried us through to the
10th of January, 1871.
Q. Was there any complaint at any time on account of wages paid'!
A. I never heard any.
Q. All were satisfied?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many hours a day was the average of those who worked on con-
tract? .
A. I do not think the miners will average over five hours per day in a
large vein; we had five miners that I don't think spent one hour a month
in the mines from some time in August until the close of the season; we
had a "squash" and they claimed the coal; a pressure came on our pillars
in the mines and pressed the coal out of the breasts, and the men claimed
it, and we paid the men as though they had mined it.
Q. What were you paying the men at the time of the suspension in Jan-
uary?
A. On a $5 50 basis; that was 50 cents above the basis price the men
agreed to work for.
Q. Then there being no complaint on account of the wages, would they
have worked for any price, so far as you know?
A. The president of the Jeddo branch said the price was not a consid-
eration; if I was to pay an $8 basis they would not work; they had been
ordered to suspend by the Grand Council and were going to; it was not
the price in our section of the country.
Q. The increase of tolls upon the railroads had nothing to do with the
price, had it?
A. Not anything.
Q. What effect has this ventilation bill upon your works?
A. I do not know that it has created any special change in our region;
we have been subject to some expense in regard to it; we put down some
speaking tubes in the mines, but it is utterly impossible to hear anything
but a rumbling sound through them; the men were satisfied, and said that
was a dead letter in the law, so far as carrying sounds 900 feet was con-
cerned.
Adjourned until 8 o'clock this evening.
The committee met at 8 o'clock P. M. Present—Messys. Davis, Dechert
and Petrikin. «
George B. Markle re-called for cross-examination.
By Mr. Brockway.—Q. Are you connected or interested in any of the
iron works at Danville?
<pb>
A. I have a slight interest in a small rolling mill at Danville.
Q. How many men had you who earn $700 a month?
A. We had but two; I was giving an extreme case; I said from $300 to
$700.
Q. Was not one of those two a son-in-law of one of your bosses?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you mean that by his individual labor he earned that amount?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did he not have others employed with him who assisted to make it?
A. One laborer; just as all our men work with.
Q. None of your miners work with more than one laborer?
A. One laborer.
Q. What does it cost to mine a ton of coal and put it on the cars at
Hazleton?
A. I cannot answer that question.
Q. Take an average during 1870?
A. I should suppose that the average price would be $1 50 per ton.
Q. What were the average prices at Elizabethport or Hoboken during
1870?
A. I cannot tell you that; they run between $5 and $6.
Q. What was the cost of transportation from your place to Elizabeth-
port?
A. I cannot answer that; some of our firm reside in Philadelphia, and
they attend to that; I attend to nothing but the mining.
Q. How many tons of coal could an average miner get out in a day at
your works?
A. We have had men mine as high as thirty tons in a day ;' I think the
average would be eighteen tons a day.
Q. How much would the miner receive per ton on an average?
A. We paid, in the days I speak of, fifty-five cents per ton to the miner.
Q. Do you keep a store in connection with your colliery?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Is the main traffic of your store with your employees?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What are your sales?
A. I cannot answer.
Q. Do you always pay your men in cash when they demand it '(
A. We have a pay day running between the 15th and 20th of the month,
and we pay our men on those days in cash.
Q. Have you ever discharged any of your men because they would not
take trade at your store'!
A. Never.
Q. Do you know the rates of freight frofn your place to Elizabethport?
A. We transport over the Lehigh Valley and Jersey Central roads; I
think the rate, in 1870, was something over $3 per ton for the whole dis-
tance to Elizabethport.
Q. What is it now?
A. We have had no coal to ship; I do not know what the rates now are.
Q. Is there now or has there been an agreement among the operators of
your section not to employ men who have belonged to the W. B. A., and
who have been discharged from other collieries for striking, &c.?
A. I do not know of such an arrangement.
Q. Has crime increased in your section since the organization of the W.
B. A.?
A. I don't know that it has.
<pb>
Q. Is not the tendency of the organization to repress crime?
A. Since the organization has been formed we have had a police force in
that region, and we have attributed it, in a great measure, to the police
force.
Q. Do you remember anything about one of these coal police tearing
down a notice put up by Mr. Williams, now a member of the House from
Luzerne?
A. I heard of it.
Q. Did you endeavor to shield him from being prosecuted for it?
A. Not any; I asked Mr. Williams if he had a warrant; he said no.
Q. Did you draw a revolver upon any person for wishing to put up this
notice?
A. No, sir.
Q. Are the prices in your store the same as in other stores in the neigh-
borhood?
A. Our clerks are ordered to sell goods as low as any other store in the
region; I do not know much about the store; it is managed by them;
some of the leading articles I know are down.
Q. Are not the miners required to furnish their own powder, oil, drills,
picks, axes, saws, &c.?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Are they not at a greater expense than ordinary mechanics because
they require different clothing to enter the mines?
A. Well, there are other mechanics and artisans that I think wear out
more clothing than miners do; probably the miner may wear out more
than a carpenter.
Q. Is it more dangerous to work in the mines than at different mechanical
trades above ground? /
A. We have been mining about eleven years, and I think there has been
eleven miners killed; we have shipped probably 2,000,000 tons of coal in
that time; and, I think, seven out of the eleven men were killed through
their own carelessness; one of them I warned out; after warning him I
walked out to the extreme end of the gangway, and before I returned they
told me he was killed.
Q. Do I understand that you consider the occupation as safe as ordinary
occupations?
A. In certain parts of our region I think it more safe than riding on
railroad cars; I think the miner is as safe as a carpenter.
Q. Has there not been a sinking of mines and a great many people de-
stroyed in your region lately?
A. Yes, sir; at the old works at Stockton the houses had been built be-
fore the present proprietors took charge, and the old workings had been
worked out, and I presume they knew nothing about it; a crush was brought
upon the mines and I believe two families went down; they were not killed
by working in the mines under ground; it was the sinking from the surface.
Q. Were not your men willing to work for 1871 for the same rates they
worked for during 1870
A. I presume they were; I do not know anything to the contrary.
Q. Was not the strike induced by your attempt, so far as your men were
concerned, to reduce the wages below what they had received in 1870?
A. They stopped when we were paying them fifty cents above the basis
price.
Q. Was that more or less than the rates of 1870?
A. It was the contract under which we were. working, or fifty cents above
what they claimed to be their stopping point.
<pb>
Q. Was it greater or less than they received in 1870?
A. Some mouths greater and some months less.
Q. The price to which you have referred, was that an agreement as to
any particular length of time or for a temporary time?
A. There is the agreement, [referring to the agreement already in evi-
dence ;] we calculated that was to run until it was mutually stopped.
Q. Either party had the right to terminate it when they saw fit or proper?
A. My interpretation of it was that it was to be mutual; it was for no
fixed time.
Q. Do you not profit in your region by a suspension in the Wyoming
valley or in the Schuylkill region, in case your men are working?
A. That depends upon whether the price of coal advanced or not; we
have generally been idle when the others have been at work; last year
Schuylkill was idle, but it made but little difference with us; I don't know
that we received any benefit from the advanced price of coal in consequence
of Schuylkill county lying idle last year.
Q. Did you not say that the object of the raise of freights was to break
down the W. B. A.?
A. I do not recollect saying that.
Q. Did you not say to them that unless they would suspend on or about
the 5th of January, that you and the rest of the operators would do so?
A. I do not recollect ever saying anything of the kind.
Q. You did not say so to Enoch P. Evans?
A. No, sir; I have no recollection of making any such remark to any
body?
Q. You spoke in your direct examination about the case of John M'Grogh;
did not the W. B. A. discharge him after that transaction?
A. I discharged him, and the W. B. A. eventually sustained me, yet it
gave me a great deal of trouble; and, furthermore, when the evidence was
brought in, two men came forward and swore positively that he was not
in the hotel when I saw him with my own eyes; I thought if that was the
testimony I had to combat with the less I had to do with it the better; they
were members of the association—they said they were; that is the only way
I know; I was sitting about sixty yards from this man when he came out of
the hotel.
Q. If all the collieries, or most of them, in the anthracite regions, are at
work, is not the supply of coal greater than the market demands?
A. Well, perhaps at the present time it would be; but my impression of
the coal trade is that if coal was produced at a price sufficiently low there
would be a demand for all that could be mined.
Q. Did you ever give any days' notice to the men when you stopped
work?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many?
A. I think our agreement was six oi ten days; I do not recollect.
Q. Did you not keep your colliery idle four months, in 1869, because
some of your men joined the union?
A. No, sir; I did not keep my colliery four months idle in '68 or '69;
my colliery was idle for a few weeks, I think, in 1868.
Q. For that reason?
A. If the union was established in 1868 I did it for that reason; it was
only sometime in 1870 that their charter was given by the Legislature.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. These grievances you speak of and these notices, Sec.
You know nothing of your own knowledge whether these men were mem-
bers of the W. B. A. or not?
<pb>
A. Nothing only what they told me; I have' nothing further than that.
and their seal.
Q. Do you know that was their seal of your own knowledge?
A. No, sir; I have seen their seal, and seen them stamp papers.
Q. Do you know that the stamp upon any of these papers was their seal''.
A. Nothing more than I have told you.
Richard Sharpe, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. Where do you reside?
A. In Eckley, Luzerne county—in the Middle coal field.
Q. How many men do you employ 1
A. I suppose our average number of men and boys would be about 300.
Q. What is your product?
A. Last year it was upwards of 160,000 tons.
Q. How long have you been in the business?
A. Since February, 1838, in different capacities.
Q. How much did your men earn, at the rate of the $5 basis, for the last
year or two?
A. I have looked over some of the accounts;. there is a good deal of
change; some worked a few months, and some commenced in the middle
of the season; my book-keeper looked over the accounts of some who had
worked the season through; some forty names, taken through the roll, ave-
raged nearly $900 for the year; the lowest on the list was somewhere in
the neighborhood of $450; he was not a regular miner, and had been a
sailor; the highest was over $1,200.
Q. What class of workmen?
A. Miners—contract men.
Q. Was there any dispute about wages at the time the suspension oc-
curred in your region?
A. No, sir; there was no dispute.
Q. You were paying at the same basis?
A. At the same basis Mr. Markle explained to you.
Q. Have you had any instances of stoppages at your colliery, or differ-
ences with the men?
A. Probably we have had as few interferences of that kind as anj- col-
liery in the neighborhood; I have always counselled the men to continue
at work and be satisfied with moderate wages; it would be increasing the
consumption; when the consumer could not depend upon a regular supply
of course it limited our ability to sell the product.
Q. What is your opinion of the effect upon the trade of these repeated
strikes for the purpose of curtailing the production?
A. It has been very disastrous to us; our sales have been to large con-
sumers—rolling mills, steamships, &c.; we don't send much to Elizabeth-
port.
Q. What has been the effect in the market, or among your customers, of
this sudden interference with the regular production?
A. They have gone to other fuel; some are burning soft coal; we find it
a difficult matter to induce them to return; the steamships are using bitu-
minous; the rolling mills are using bituminous almost all together, or
semi-bituminous.
By Mr. Hall Q. You speak of employing 300 men and boys, and the
average of some is $900 a year?
A. I said for last year.
Q. How many of them earned that?
<pb>
A. About forty men have averaged that who have worked the whole
year; many of them who have worked a part of the year averaged at that
rate when they did work.
Q. Those forty were skilled miners, working at contract price, under
ground?
A. A great many of them were not what we call first-class, skilled miners;
probably not in the mines five years.
Q. How much did the other 260 get?
A. I could not tell you.
Q. What did you pay outside laborers during the same time 1 .
A. We paid from $1 60 to $2 a day on the $5 basis; when it was more
we paid more. <'
Q. What did you pay inside laborers at the $5 basis?
A. The lowest was $13 20 per week; sometimes they received extra,
above that.
Q, How many of these 300 were outside laborers, including mechanics?
A. I suppose fifty or sixty.
Q. How many were inside laborers 1
A. There might probably have been seventy-five or more—that is in-
cluding the repairers and helpers.
Q. What did you give Ihe rest of the 300?
A. There are boys who received various wages; a boy of sixteen years
of age, who drives a mule, gets as much as an outside laborer; some w.ho
drive two mules get as much as an inside laborer.
Q. $1 60 to $2 a day?
A. More, some of them.
Q. Was the basis then $5 at Elizabethport 7
A. The rate was calculated at $5 50 in August.
[The witness produces pay list.j
Take December, when there was a $5 basis—what did you pay out-
side laborers?
A. Here is a man who worked 260 hours; his wages were $52 for twen-
ty-six days; that would be $2 a day.
That man worked every working day?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. I suppose the average run did not do that—sometimes they would
have sickness, I Buppose?
A. Sometimes, I suppose; every one is liable to that.
Q. Name over several?
A. [Looking at the pay-roll.] Here is a man who worked twenty-four
days, his wages were somewhat lower; he earned $43 20; he was a team-
ster's assistant; a teamster worked twenty-three days and made $46 00.
Q. Take the next man?
A. He appears to have worked only ten days; he made $22 90; the
next man worked twenty-one days, and made $41 60; the next man worked
twewty-three and a-half days, and made $47 50; the next twenty-two and
a-half days, $45 00.
Q. Give me the rate of inside laborers for the same month at the same
rate?
A. The first one I come to worked twenty-four days, and made $54 96.
Q. Is he a married man?
A. No, sir; the next one is a man who worked with a miner and earned
$39 60 in eighteen days; the next one, who is a married man, made $59 54
in twenty-six days. Here is one who worked twenty-one and a-half days
<pb>
and made $50 88; he worked inside; the next twenty-one days—$46 CO.
These are men who worked by the day for the miners—inside laborers.
Q. Do you deduct the doctor's bills, whether they need doctors or not'(
A. Yes, sir; men go there with the understanding that they are to pay
a monthly stipend for the doctor.
Q. Whether they need him or not?
A. They pay for a doctor monthly; if they need him every day he goes.
Q. They pay him to keep them well 1
A. Yes, sir; we think it the best plan.
Q. You employ the doctor?
A. No; he lives there.
Q. How much did they pay every month?
A. Single men pay 50 cents and married men 75 cents, and he furnishes
the medicine.
Q. Is that 75 cents for each member of the family?
A. No, sir; unless some of the family are grown up and earn men's
wages, and then they pay because they are liable to accident.
Q. Suppose a man is injured in the mines, do you take care of him or
does the association do it?
A. I don't know what the association does for them. I know we have fre-
quently made advances to those who were injured, and when they have got
well and able to work they would walk off and leave us.
Q. Suppose a man was killed in the mines, and left a widow and children,
do you know that the association takes charge of them and pays them?
A. I do not.
Q. Do the operators do that?
A. We do not pay them so much a month, we often contribute to the wants
of the needy. I can refer to one case where a man was sick for some time
and died of consumption; he left a widow, with two or three children—
small boys—who were working on the breakers, selecting coal; their wages
were not sufficient to re-pay what we had advanced; about a year ago the
widow married again; up to that time the balance against her account was
$374; this man who married her, because we would not make further ad-
vances, left us.
Q. Did this man die of consumption, because of working under ground?
A. I don't think he worked under ground; people on the surface of the
ground has consumption.
Q. This is an exceptional case—you do not make those advances often?
A. Yes, sir; I can show you several.
Q. How long have you been in the coal business?
A. Since 1838.
Q. There was no dispute between the men and operators about wages
when the last suspension occurred?
A. None at all—no notice of the suspension from the men either.
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. What caused the suspension?
A. It was noised abroad before we heard of it ourselves; our customers
were writing to us that if a suspension were to take place to send them an
additional quantity of coal; they thought that we were all powerful and
could produce our production ad libitum, which was impossible; when the
men ceased we would have to ceasee, too; I spoke to one of our men, and
told them they did not give us any notice; he asked if I had not seen it in
the Monitor; I don't know that I was obliged to subscribe to the Monitor,
or read it; that appears to be evidence that that paper was the official
organ.
Q. What caused the suspension?
<pb>
A. This Monitor had given the proceedings of the General Council in
which the suspension was ordered to take place on the 10th of January.
By Mr. Hall—Q. Was there an association of coal operators up there?
A. No, sir.
Q. Nothing of the kind'!
A. No organized association; we frequently met.
Q. Do you belong to the New York Hoard of Trade?
A. No, sir; the operators who sell coal in New York have a practice of
meeting monthly and fixing the price for the next month; they issue a cir-
cular to their customers; the W. B. A. demand a copy of that, so as to
know what their wages shall be for the month.
Q. These gentlemen go to New York and meet and fix upon the wages
for the workingmen, at a meeting in which the W. B. A. have no represen-
tation 'I
A. Most of those who attend to that business live in New York; they
lix the'prices; our agreement is similar to Mr. Markle's.
Q. The miners and laborers were not represented at the New York
meeting?
A. I suppose net; I was not there; that was not their agreement that
we should participate.
Q. Did not some of the operators in your country notify the men that
they would not pay this price any longer? Don't you know that fact—1
mean before the suspension?
A. No, sir; after the suspension we notified them that there would be a
change; we had always argued that the rates were too high; after paying
the transportation and expenses it left little or nothing to the operators, at
five dollars.
Q. Has not the business been a prosperous business with you?
A. We have some years.made money and some we have lost; taking it
as a whole it has been reasonably prosperous.
Q. These men did not inform the miners before the suspension that wages
would be reduced?
A. Not that I am aware of.
Q. Are you working now?
A. No, sir.
Q. Is there any work being done up there?
A. -None except Mr. Packer's, and I cannot speak positively of that; I
don't know how he gets his coal to market.
Q. This bituminous coal—is it got entirely from Bradfield company?
A. I think not; I noticed that the smoke of the chimneys that that coal
was being used; I suppose the use of it is being increased. You asked me
about cases where we had made advances to persons to supply their wants.
I will state another: A man applied to me in the early part of the month;
lie asked me if we would advance him and his family some provisions; he
was not destitute yet, but if the strike should last through April he would
be in want; I told him if he was sick he should not want for provisions;
as it was, he was walking about idle, and that put a different face upon the
matter. I took the trouble to look back over his account for six years.
The result was this: His own earnings in that time averaged $1,325 a year,
or $25 for every week in the six years; or, as near as I could tell, for the
days he had worked, $5 27 a day. At the beginning of 1865 hi had a bal-
ance standing to his credit. I thought it was singular that one of our best
workmen should make a request at that time; at the commencement of the
six years he had a credit of $105; he had sometimes two or three boys at
<pb>
work, and their earnings during these six years, added to his, amounted up
to over $12,000.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. What was his average for those six years?
A. His own earnings were $7,955; from suspensions there was about
fourteen months lost time.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Do you know ai^ men that saved any money, who had
a family, on this basis of five dollars, who was an outside laborer?
A. I cannot call to my recollection any now; I cannot tell what they do
with their money.
Q. You would know if it was a balance increasing from year to year?
A. I cannot tell what they do with it; there is a balance of $229 in favor
of one.
Q. Did he save that?
A. I don't know what he saved.
Q. Is he an outside man?
A. Yes, sir; his wages were two dollars a clay on the $5 00 basis; I be-
lieve he has a wife; I don't think he has any children.
Q. Did he buy any thing at your store?
A. I think it is probable he did; his store bill for December was $10.
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. Do you charge for their fuel?
A. Yes, sir; a moderate amount.
By Mr. Hall—Q. Look over several months and see how many days this
man worked—take December?
A. He worked full time in December, 26 or 27 days; he earned $53ihat
month; in November he made the same; I think he worked all the time.
Q. What was his business?
A. I think he was a screen boss.
Q. How much did he get in July?
A. $53.
Q. Do you get any commission on any of the bills the men pay?
A. The butcher, I believe, allows something on the calculation of prompt
payment to him.
Q. How much percentage?
A. Sometimes we don't charge anything and sometimes three per cent.,
which depends sometimes on the amount; sometimes it is scarcely worth
making a charge.
Q. Who does the percentage come from?
A. The butcher.
Q. Don't it come off from the men in the end?
A. I don't know; I pay just the same for my meat.
Q. Don't the butcher charge the men more than he charges you in order
to be able to pay you a commission for collecting his debt?
A. We do just about the same as a lawyer does when he collects a debt
and charges the commission.
Q. Does the butcher make the laboring man pay that commission?
A. He charges his bills at the regular price, the same as he charges me,
and sometimes less.
Q. Was there anything else that there was commission charged for?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you charge more in your store than they could buy elsewhere?
A. When we made this proposition in February to the men to go to work
provisions were lower than when we made the basis in 1869, and to con-
vince the men that they would earn as much I examined the price of goods
at that time and at the present time, and had a circular printed and issued
to the men showing that fact; some one said it might be so, but that it was
<pb>
not so at Hazleton and other places; I thought it singular, because at
Hazleton there are two co-operative stores for the benefit of the miners.
Q. There is no co-operative store at your place?
A. There is one near there; there is a co-operative store and independ-
ent stores.
Q. How long has the co-operative store been started?
A. A year or more.
Q. That was started in order to prevent the men being charged too much?
A. No.
Q. What was it for?
A. I don't know; the workingmen are the stockholders, I suppose.
Q. You stated that whenever the men did not like your terms they could
leave?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. They have that right?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. They exercised that right when they thought best?' •
A. I suppose they do.
Q. And they are likely to continue to do it in the future?
A. I suppose so; I have no control over them.
Q. And you don't pretend to own the men?
A. No, sir, they control us sometimes; they go away and still keep our
houses.
Q. You have your legal remedy; do you have your ten days' notice in
the leases?
A. I don't think we have any under leases.
Q. Had you an arrangement with the men by which you could turn them
out at ten days' notice?
A. We had at one time an arrangement, but I do not recollect the number
of days.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. Do you mean to say you keep a record of the earn-
ings and expenditures of your men so that you can tell how much they
spend?
A. No, sir.
Q. Does your books show what the man saves?
A. No, sir; it shows that our men did not draw all the money; that is
all; I can show their balances; that don't show that they saved it.
Q. This payment of fifty cents a month to the doctor was agreed to by
the men?
A. The men know that is one of the rules when they go to work.
Q. The doctor is obliged to attend when they are sick?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. They pay nothing extra?
A. Not for accidents or sickness.
Q. This New York meeting to fix the prices—that is to fix the price of
coal?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have you ever heard that it was customary to ask the men to consult
you as to what price you should charge your customers?
A. No, sir; I don't think that is usual in any business.
Q. Have not the men agreed to take a rate of wages which should de-
pend upon what you received for the coal?
A. What the Board of Trade received.
By Mr. Hall Q. As you have referred to other branches of bushiest!,
<pb>
please to tell me any man who pays his men the sliding scale in the maniu
factoring business?
A. I don't know of any.
Q. Do you know of any branch of business in which it is done except this?
A. No; I think when the manufacturer gets a high price he pays a higher
price to the laborer.
Q. In your bargain the laborer is to get their much or little according to
how yon sell coal in New York—whether for a large price or small price ; are
not the men, therefore, directly interested in what coal brings in New York?
A. Of course.
Q. And yet at the time these prices are established nobody represents
them?
A. I suppose not; I have never been present.
Q. Don't you get your labor at the cheapest rates you can?
A. We get it at the same rates other people pay.
Q. Do you complain of the workingmen getting as good wages as they
can for their labor?
A. We pay them according to the price of coal; we pay the same price
as others do.
Q. Do you complain, as an operator, for these men getting as much for
their labor as they can?
A. I do not.
By Mr. Gowen—Q. You stated a little while ago that a man had the
right to leave when he pleased; has he, after leaving, a right to prevent
any many from taking his place?
A. They claim that right.
Q. Do you think he has a right morally to do it?
A. I don't think he has.
By Mr. Hall Q. Does the Workingmen's Benevolent association of
Pennsylvania claim that right?
A. I don't know that I can answer that question; I have not read their
constitution; I don't know whether, as an association, they claim it or not;
I know that there have been complaints made when a man has been put in
the place of one who belonged to the association.
William Carr, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. You are superintendent for Linderman & Skeer, at the Stockton
mines?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How long have you been there?
A. I have been there for sixteen years.
Q. Give us any statements of notices, intimidations or stoppages of
pumps, or anything of that kind lately. [Paper produced.] What is this
paper?
A. That is the copy of a paper that I received.
Q. Where is the original?
A. It was lost; Dr. Linderman lost it; I know that to be a true copy;
I was there and compared it; I have made search for the original.
Q. Who gave you this?
A. I think it was Malcolm Ferguson.
Q. Who was he?
A. A member of the association.
Mr. Hall.—This does not purport to be a notice served upon witness by
anybody.
<pb>
Mr. Gowen.—I offer it under the previous ruling.
[Admitted if connected with the association. Marked E.j
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. You say the original of this was handed to you?
A. Yes, sir; I then sent it to Dr. Linderman, in Mauch Chunk; before
I sent it I had this c»jpy made and compared it with the original; I will
swear that this is correct: the original has been mislaid, and Doctor Lin-
derman cannot find it.
Q. What was the result of that?
A. The result was that the men all joined the Union, except one, and he
left; he was a teamster; he lost his place; I went around and talked to
these men myself, and told them we did not wish to discharge them nor to
have the mines lying idle.
Q. You have had some trouble since the suspension?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Did any suspension take place on account of this?
A. No, sir.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. Give us the history of any trouble since the suspen-
pension?
A. In general we paid the $5 00 basis; the men stopped on the 10th of
January; the Lehigh Board of Trade, I believe, having no coal to sell, did
not alter the price of wages. The president of the district was away from
home, I believe, three or four days; he came home in the evening; on the
6th of February, I believe, he asked me what the price was going to be for
this month; I told him I had not had any orders to change it, and that 1
presumed it would be the same as the previous month.
Q. That was for "dead work."
A. Yes, sir.' ,
Q. You were not shipping coal?
A. No, sir; he said he did not think it would do, and they called a meet-
ing about it, I believe y they held a meeting on the 7th, I think; they came
that evening and told me that the firemen should all be stopped; they or-
dered them to stop; I told them not to stop until I saw the doctor.
Q. What occurred?
A. The pumps were stopped from seven in the morning until the day
following.
Q. How did you get them started again?
A. By giving them a $7 50 basis; I came home and sent for the presi-
dent of the W. B. A. for that district; I told him to get his men together,
and told him we would pay him—there were two newspapers stating the
price of coal, one said $7 and one $7 50—I will give you $7 50, and told
him to go and get his men and get those pumps started; before we got
steam up it was about half-past two o'clock; they worked on until the 15th
of February; they then stopped the pumps again; they stopped the fire-
men working.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. You know the fact?
A. I know the men stopped working; the pumps stood from the morning
until the next day at about four o'clock; I sent to Hazleton and got a po-
lice force, and the pumps are now running under this police force, and have
been ever since.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. What would have been the effect of stopping the
pumps for a week or two?
A. We could not have drained the mines in a year.
Q. How many collieries have you there?
A. We have four slopes hoisting coal and one pumping water.
Q. What is the annual production about Stockton?
<pb>
A. We produced last year 278,000 tons. I have another notice here; it
is a letter which was sent to me.
[Letter produced.]
Q. Who was that directed to?
A. One of our ticket men; he is now helping to keep the water out; he
did belong to the Union; he withdrew and worked. I sent around in the
evening, before I employed the police force, with Mr. Brodhead to every
fireman except two, who lived far away; I offered firemen $3 a day pro-
vided they would go to work; I told them I would give them until 1 o'clock
the next morning to consider it; finally I waited until eight the next
morning, and they did not come at all; I offered them protection, and
that if the mines stopped working and the men struck against them, that
the company would pay them for the time lost. They did not refuse, but
they did not come.
H. That was to save the whole property from destruction?
A. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hall objected to the paper, as being hearsay evidence.
Mr. Gowen I will not press it unless I can prove that the witness re-
ceived the letter; I will withdraw it for the present.
Mr• Hall.—We do not admit that John Lloyd or an3'body else other
than the head of this organization can bind it.
By Mr. Hall Q. You were the agent of Linderman?
A. Yes, air..
Q. Linderman is the son-in-law of Packer? . .
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You say that these men joined the Union—were you ever in the Union?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you se!e them join the Union?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you know any thing but what they told you?
A. No, sir; they told me so; I know some of them left it.
Q. Do you know that they joined?
A. No more than what they told me.
Q. Then you don't know it of your own personal knowledge?
A. I know if they had not joined these men would have stopped.
Q. Do you know of your own personal knowledge whether Thomas James
is the secretary of the organization at this particular point?
A. I don't know positive; I would recognize his signature.
Q. Do you know it of your own personal knowledge?
A. I have heard say he was; that is the only way I know it.
Q. Do you know of your own personal knowledge that one man did not
join the Union?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Why?
A. He left.
Q. Might he not join it and then leave?
A. He would not be likely to.
Q. Do you know of your own personal knowledge that any of these men
that did what you say is wrong belong to the W. 13. A.?
A. I did not say it was wrong.
Q. They did not work at the pumps?
A. That was before.
Q. Did any of those who would not work at the pumps belong to the a -
sociation? . ,
A. 1 suppose they did
<pb>
Q. Do yoa know it ¥
A. Nothing more than what they say.
Q. Did Linderman notify his men that he would not par the rates of 18T0
for 1871?
A. No, sir; nothing more than by this circular.
Q. Do you not know, as the agent of Dr. Linderman, that these men
were willing to work at the rates of 1870 for 1871?
A. They never came and said so.
Q. Don't you know it?
A. No, sir.
Q. What is the purport of this paper?
A. That is the printed circular they showed.
[Offered in evidence by Mr. Hall, marked F.]
Q. I want to know, after these men met in Philadelphia to settle every-
thing among themselves, and what the price was to be, and what the work-
men were to do and not do, what the object in choosing an umpire was?
A. I cannot answer that question; I don't know.
Q. You have had a great deal of experience in the coal business?
A. Some.
Q. What complaint could any man have against his men if they lived
up to everything that is in there ¥
A. They did not.
Q. Did not Dr. Linderman notify his men that he would not pay the
rates of 1870 for 1871?
A. Not that I remember of.
Q. Don't you know that they were all notified of it long before any strike
or talk of a strike?
A. No, sir.
Q. Have not these men the liberty to stop work and give up their places,
if they choose?
A. I suppose so.
Q. And the only penalty is that they do not get paid?
A. That is all, I guess.
Q. And can you suggest any other penalty that could be put upon them?
A. They are their own free agents; they can do as they please.
Q. Did any one stop the firemen, or did they stop themselves?
A. They stopped themselves, so far as I know.
Q. These works are along the line of the Lehigh Valley railroad?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. They are not in operation now 1
A. No, sir.
Q. No coal being shipped there now?
A. A little, I suppose.
By Mr. Gowen Q. You say before the suspension took place the men
were not told that their wages were to be reduced?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you tell them?
A. No.
Q. Never told them anything of the kind?
A. No, sir.
Q. You are the one who generally communicates with them?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Mr. Linderman did not live at the mines ?^
A. No, sir.
<pb>
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Do you pretend to say that Doctor Linderman did
not tell these men that he would not pay the wages of 1870 for 1871?
A. I don't know that he did.
George S. Repleir, called by Mr. Gowen, being affirmed, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. Where do you live?
A. Philadelphia.
Q. What is jour business?
A. Mining and selling coal.
Q. How long have you been connected with that business?
A. About twenty or twenty-one years. »
„ Q. At the time the suspension took place in Schuj-lkill, on the 10th of
January, was there any dispute between you and the men as to wages?
A. There was not.
Q. Are you working now?
A. No, sir.
Q. Why don't 3'ou commence to work?
A. There was suspension ordered by the Grand Council of the working-
men, and they stopped.
Q. Have not they ordered a resumption since?
A. They have.
Q. Why don't you go to work?
A. Because we could not agree upon wages.
Q. What did they ask?
A. I am not positive about that; I think it was the $3 basis.
Q. Is that the reason you are now idle %
A. That is the reason I am now idle.
Q. Had you determined not to go to work at these wages before the tolls
were raised on the Reading road?
A. I determined not to go to work before they raised.
Q. Is it the high tolls on the Reading road that keeps you idle?
A. No, sir.
By Mr. Hall Q. Have you been a member of the W. B. A.?
A. God forbid.
Q. Have you ever been in any of their meetings or councils?
A. I have not.
Q. How do you know that they did this?
A. When I picked up a paper and read the proceedings of the Legisla-
ture here, I take it for granted that what I read is so. I pick up the Moni-
tor and I read what the Grand Council have passed, and I take it for
granted it is so.
Q. You get the information that you give here, and give us on your sol-
emn oath, from the. newspapers of the country, and that is the only informa-
tion you have on the subject?
A. I sometimes get my information from others.
Q. Where did you get the information?
A. I think I read it in the papers.
Q. You got it in no other way?
A. Yes, sir; I have been told by other parties.
Q. Then you have got it by hearsay and by readiug the papers—that is
all you know about it?
A. Yes, sir.!
Q. You are not aware that the obligation was to tell what you know of
your own personal knowledge.
9
<pb>
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have you of your own personal knowledge any information about
the W. B. A.?
A. I have not said so.
Q. Have you?
A. I have not.
Q. When you say "they asked more than we could pay," you mean that
certain men asked more; you don't know what organization they belonged
to; is that right?
A. No.
Q. Then give us an answer that is right.
A. If you want it of my own personal knowledge I cannot answer at all.
Q. Could you work successfully and pay $6 00 for carrying a ton of coal
from Port Carbon to Philadelphia?
A. I could resume if I could pay the wages that are demanded, and if I
resumed alone I think I could make it pay and give those wages even at'
the high rate of toll, or if the entire regions resumed I don't think I could.
Q. Do you consider $6 00 for a ton of coal from Port Carbon to Phila-
delphia a reasonably fair and just rate?
A. I do not.
Q. You consider it unreasonable, unfair and unjust?
A. I consider it unreasonable.
Q. You are largely engaged in the coal business?
A. Tolerable.
Q. One of the largest operators in Philadelphia 7
A. Yes, sir; I am a preMy large operator.
Q. Did you ever make an offer of wages to the men since the men offered
to resume work?
A. Individually I did not.
By Mr. Gowen Q. The coal operators united with you and made an
offer?
A. Yes, sir; I don't know of my own personal knowledge.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Did you ever make an offer of wages to your men since
the men offered to go to work—do you pretend to say any association made
an offer to your men?
A. I do.
Q. Who did it?
A. It was in the public prints.
Q. Do you know that your men saw that and read it?
A. I do not.
By Mr. Gowen Q. Your men have committees, and the committees and
the operators have met?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you know whether or not the Reading raikoad company have
agreed to reduce the tolls at tbe moment there is a general resumption?
A. I know that.
Q. If the workingmen would accept the offer of the operators and go to
work, you could all go to work at once?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Could you all go to work under the present tolls of
the Reading railroad?
A. I told you before, that I could not; Mr. Gowen has promised to re-
duce; his promises are very good, and he will keep them.
Q. You are taking it for granted that if resumes at those rates,
<pb>
and the Reading company put its rates down, then you can resume your
business?
A. Yes, sir; Mr. Gowen has agreed to put them at less than $2 00.
Q. When you had the conversation with Mr. Gowen, at which he pro-
mised to put them at that, did he agree with you that the present rates are
unreasonable?
A. No, sir.
Q. You are a member of the Anthracite Board of Trade of Philadelphia,
are you not?
A. No; I am not a member.
Q. Were you ever a member?
A. I was.
Q. At what time? /
A. The first of January this year.
Q. Did you attend the meetings that were held between the railroad
officers and certain people down there?
A. No, sir; I have ceased connection with the board.
Q. Had they done anything that you did not of approve?
A. No, sir; I act with them.
George W. Cole, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Where do you reside?
A. At Tamaqua.
Q. What is you business?
A. Coal operator. ,
Q. How long have you been in that business?
A. Since October 1849.
Q. You were one of the committee of the Anthracite Board of Trade,
that signed that proposition for an adjustment of wages for 1871?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What occurred—who came with you to the office of the Reading
railroad company in November last with that proposition?
A. There was a meeting of the joint committee of the workingmen and
the Anthracite Board of Trade to endeavor to adjust the wages for 1871.
They met, and the result was a recommendation, upon the part of both,
"to work at a certain rate of wages for 1871, on condition that Mr.
Gowen reduced his rates of transportation," which was reduced to writing,
[paper shown witness ;] that is my signature on that paper; there was a
sub-committee, on the part of the workingmen in Schuylkill county, con-
sisting of Mr. Siney and Mr. Ryan, and a committee on the part of the
operators, consisting of myself and Mr. Kendrick, to consult Mr. Gowen.
Mr. Gowen, I think, told us that there would be a satisfactory rate of
tolls made for the year 1871, at the proper time—sometime in January or
February—and that he would be glad to see the sub-committee again to
consult with them.
Q. What conditions did I make?
A. You demanded regular, uninterrupted work throughout the year,
and no strikes.
Q. Was that acquiesced in?
A. You said that you were opposed to any suspension; that you thought
it was to the interest of all that there should be a regular business. I
think Mr. Siney made the remark that there would be too much coal, pro-
duced, and that something should be done to create a scarcity of coal so
as to make certain wages. Mr. Gowen objected and the matter was left in
<pb>
that shape; you gave them to understand distinctly that you was opposed
to suspension.
Q. Did you have any conversations with any of the officers of the asso-
ciation since, about the adoption of that proposition?
A. At the time the proposition was entered into it was stated on the
part of Mr. Siney, that there would be no difficulty about having those
prices carried out. He afterwards stated in my presence that they had
been adopted by the men in Schuylkill county.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. This is a proposition for adjusting the wages?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You say that Siney told you afterwards that their recommendation
had been adopted by their association in Schuylkill county; where did he
tell you that?
A. In Mr. Kendrick's office, in Pottsville, in the presence of Mr. Kendrick,
and, I think, Mr. Seigfried.
Q. He heard it?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. When was it?
A. I cannot tell you; sometime prior to the suspension in January; I
think it was in the latter part of November.
Q. Who else was there besides those you have named?
A. I don't recollect of any person.
Q. He told you that the men of Schuylkill county—the W. B. A. had
met' and adopted this proposition?
A. That is what I understood him.
Q. Did he tell you so?
A. He told me distinctly that they had adopted that recommendation.
Q. What time in the day was it?
A. I think it was in the morning.
Q. About what hour?
A. About eleven o'clock.
Q. What were you doing there?
A. I don't know that I can recollect that?
Q. What kind of a day was it?
A. A fine day.
Q. What time of day was it?
A. I live twelve miles from Pottsville and left there at half past eight
o'clock in the morning.
Q. Who did you meet in Pottsville that day?
A. I cannot recollect that.
Q. Did you meet Senator Randall there that day?
A. I don't think I did.
Q. Who did you meet?
A. I met the gentleman who keeps the hotel where I stopped.
Q. What did they call that hotel?
A. The Merchants.
Q. Did you register your name?
A. If I did not I think they did; it was put upon the book, I think.
Q. Did you tell this to anybody that Siney told you that the men had
adopted it?
A. I don't think I did.
Q. Never, up to this time?
A. Yes, sir; I have.
Q, Who did you tell it to?
A. T think to Mr. Gowen.
<pb>
Q. When and how came you to tell him?
A. It came out in reference to our difficulties in that county.
Q. When did this conversation between you and Mr. Siney take place?
A. I think sometime between the 10th of November and the middle of
December.
Q. Cannot you come nearer than that?
A. No, sir.
Q. How long was it after this recommendation was made?
A. I suppose sometime within the time I mentioned.
Q. How long after the recommendation was it that Siney said this?
A. Say two weeks; it was within a month, I think.
Q. You can come within a month of the time and cannot tell what you
were doing in Kendrick's office, and yet you recollect this distinctly.
A. Certainly, because it was important to me as an operator.
Q. Was it not important enough to recollect within a reasonable time of'
when it took place?
A. No, sir; I did not put it down. /
Q. Did you tell Mr. Gowen?
A. I think I did.
Q. When and where?
A. If I told him I told him in his office in Philadelphia sometime within
the last month.
Q. What were you doing in his office in Philadelphia?
A. I saw him upon business; not about this.
Q. Don't you know that Mr. Gowan told the operators, including W. B.
—, that if they would go to work at the $3 basis he would put the tolls
up so high as to prevent doing business?
A. No, sir.
Q. Don't you know that he said if they carried a small amount he would
make them paj' for as much as if the road was carrying its full capacity?
A. I do not.
Q. Did not you tell Colonel Hitner this?
A. I don't think that I did.
Q. If you did, did you tell him the truth?
A. I undoubtedly told him the truth, if I told him anything.
Q. Did not you tell Mr. Schall that Mr. Gowen said that if they went to
work at the three dollar basis that he would put the tolls so high that they
could not do business?
A. No, sir; I don't recollect it. . .
Q. You say it is not true that Mr. Gowen said this?
A. I do not say so; I did not hear him say it.
Q. Was it the general understanding among the operators that if they
did it Mr. Gowen would do so and so, because he said so?
Objected to by Mr. Gowen; objection sustained.
Q. Did you ever complain, last year, about high rates of toll on the
Reading railroad?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you complain now? <
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you think they are too high—do you think they arc reasonable?
A. No, sir; I do not.
Q. Are they exorbitant?
A. They are very high.
Q. It would be quite impossible under them for you to operate success-
fully in coal?
<pb>
A. No, sir; not if nobody operated but us.
Q. If the coal trade was resumed you could not make money at the
rates now charged on the Reading railroad?
A. I don't think I could.
By Mr. Gowen—Q. Don't you know they are going to reduce when they
resume?
A. I received notice that they would be reduced.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Was not the agreement that the basis should not be
settled until after the New York meeting!
A. No, sir.
Q. Have you been in the coal business since the Reading railroad put
up their freights to this exorbitant price?
A. I have an option now; I do not propose to do it until I can make
satisfactory arrangements with men who conduct my coal.
Q. Will you ship if you can make satisfactory arrangements?
A. I will.
J. K. Seigfried, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. What is your business?
A. I am in the coal business in Schuylkill.
Q. Had you any conversation with Mr. Siney on the subject of the adop-
tion of the proposition made last November, for 1871?
A. I was present last week in one of the committee rooms here—either
Thursday or Friday—and I was talking with Mr. Kendrick after the
committee had adjourned, when Mr. Siney stepped up and asked Mr. Ken-
drick whether he meant to say that he [Mr. Siney] told him the men had
accepted that proposition made in November, and if so, when and whore.
Mr. Kendrick's reply was that he certainly so understood him to say in
his own office in Pottsville, to which Mr. Siney replied: "Oh, yes, it was
accepted at that time but afterwards withdrawn." That was all that took
place.
By Mr. Hall—Q. Who subpoenaed you in this case?
A. The Anthracite Board of Trade.
Q. Were you a witness before?
A. No, sir.
Q. What were you doing here on Thursday or Friday?
A. Doing like a great many others—waiting; I was subpoenaed before.
Q. At what time did this conversation take place?
A. In the evening, after the committee had adjourned.
Q. Nobody else heard it but you and Kendrick?
A. No, sir.
Q. Kendrick heard all that you heard?
A. I presume so.
Q. Did you hear what Mr. Kendrick said here last night?
A. I believe I heard most of it.
. You say Kendrick heard all that you heard?
. I suppose so.
Q. Did you tell it to anybody?
A. I don't know that I did; perhaps I did; I think I did.
Q. When did you first tell it?
A. I cannot say positively.
Q. If you did not tell it to anybody, how did they come to subpoena
you?
<pb>
A. I told you I believe I did tell it; I don't know when or where, or to
whom.
Q. Have you not stated, as regards the safety of property and the preven-
tion of crime, you would rather have that association in existence than not?
A. I have repeated and I say so now; I think crime has largely dimin-
ished since they were organized.
Q. Did you talk in your meeting about restricting the supply of coal in
order to raise the price?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you say you would do so?
A. No, sir; I never said so. :.
Q. Have you ever made any agreement in order to prevent the supply?
A. I have not; I have talked about the policy.
Q". Have you recommended that idea—that such was the proper course?
A. I don't know that I have; I have said that I never believed in sus-
pensions or strikes in order to diminish the supply.
By Mr. Petrikin Q. What would be the remedy for an over-production?
A. My idea is, if there is an over-production, that in order to keep it
steady, we had better, instead of having suspension, stop one day in a
week, if necessary; let all stop one day in a week and prevent a stoppage
for any longer time.
Admitted by the Philadelphia and Reading railroad company that they
leased the canal between Philadelphia and Port Carbon, last year, for 999
years.
Adjourned until Tuesday next at half-past two o'clock P. M.
. . Harrisbbrg, March 21, 1871.
Committee met at half-past two P. M. All the members being present.
Mr. Lamberton offered in evidence the acts of the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania concerning the Lehigh coal and navigation company; two
pamphlets, containing the charter of the company and the supplements.
The original act was approved 20th of March, 1818; the last supplement
March 15, 1867. [Marked exhibits "C" and "D."]
Mr. Lamberton—We were also asked for the date of the lease of the
Schuylkill canal to the Philadelphia and Reading railroad company; it is
dated July 12, 1870, for 999 years, from the 1st of January, 1870.
Thomas Waddell, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified
as follows:
Q. Where do you live?
. A. Pittston.
Q. You are an operator?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. State whether you have any statement made out of the wages you
paid to your men in 1870, and the average!
A. I have a small statement here; the average of miners was about $5 00
a day.
Q. Look at that statement, and tell me what was the lowest sum made
per day by any miner working by contract, and what was the highest.
A. The one working in the most difficult place I had made |4 72; the
highest was $5 and some odd cents.
<pb>
Q. Was there any complaint made by your men, as to the rate of wages,
before this strike on the 1st of December, 1870?
A. No, sir.
Q. How did the rate of wages you were paying to your men compare
with that offered by the Pennsylvania coal company? take the month of
September, 1870 ? .
A. It was 30^ cents a ton more than I paid.
Q. Were they paying 30^ cents a ton more than you were paying at that
time?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How was it in the month of October?
A. Thirty and a half cents.
Q. How much in the month of November?
A. Fifteen and a half cents.
Q. When did the strike take place?
A. With them on the 1st of December, 1870; with me on the 10th of
January, 1871.
Q. How much did the Pennsylvania coal company propose to reduce the
wages?
A. Fifteen cents.
Q. Then the proposed reduction of the Pennsylvania coal company, to
take effect on the 1st of December, would have brought the wages to the
same standard and rate which you were paying.
A. One-half a cent more.
Q. In giving this statement of the average that was made by the miners
working by contract in November, you were paying the same, less one-half
a cent, that the Pennsylvania coal company offered?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you know how the other companies, in their proposition, com-
pared with the offer made by the Pennsylvania coal company?
A. I could not tell from my personal knowledge.
Q. What are the names of the three large companies in your region?
A. The Delaware and Hudson canal company, the Delaware, Lackawana
and Western railway company, and the Pennsylvania coal company.
Q. The excuse for the strike on the 1st of December was the proposed
. reduction of the wages by these three companies?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have you any other statements?
A. When the men in my employ came to me in January and told me
they had orders to quit on the 10th of January, I stated to them that if
they would work I would undertake to send coal to market; that I had an
arrangement made for all the lump coal that I could mine for four days a
week. About the 20th or 25th of January I sent for them again and told
them I was asked by Mr. Storrs for some lump coal; they said they would
lay it before the district delegates of the W. B. A., who met that night;
the next day the men informed me that they could not work, so that fin-
ished it.
Q. What was the reason given that they could not work?
A. They did not tell me; they said they got orders; the only reason
they gave me was that they had orders that they should not work.
Q. Were they satisfied to go to work at the wages offered?
A. Yes, sir; two-thirds of the men were willing to go to work.
Q. There was no dissatisfaction with the wages offered to your men?
A. No, sir; I had no trouble with them.
<pb>
Q. The orders had come from the association that they should not re-
sume work?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Brockway Q. Would you not have shipped coal if the tolls on
the railroad had not been raised?
A. I could not, unless I made other contracts than I had already made.
Q. Are you a practical miner 1 • 1 .
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How do you know what the Pennsylvania coal company was offer-
ing?
A. I was there at the time, in Pittston; I went to their office, and I saw
what they offered to pay.
Q. All you know about it is what they told you?"
A. I saw their books, and heard what the superintendents told me, and
what the committee told me.
Objected to.
Q. How many men had you working for you?
A. About 100 men and boys.
Q. How many of your men worked by contract?
A. About 20 or 25.
Q. How much per ton did you pay your men?
A. I paid from 62^ cents up to 93f cents.
Q. You mean for different months?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many tons per day do your men mine, upon an average?!
.A. If they filled their cars full their would be ten tons.
Q. What was the price of coal at Elizabethport when these wages were
paid?
A. I don't know; I could not ship.
Q. How many of your men worked for laborers' wages?
A. About one-half.
Q. What do they get?
A. That depends upon the coal; they get so much, according to the rise
and fall of price.
Q. What were the average wages of laborers in your colliery for 1870?
A. I do not know.
Q. As near as you can tell i
A. From June 22,1869, until December, 1870, one laborer made $1,069 06,
for 349£ days.
Q. Was he an average laborer in your mines?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Has there been any difficulty between you and your men?
A. No, sir; nothing more than ordinary little questions; I had a very
good class of men to get along with.
Q. When did you pay them?
A. Every month.
Q. What was your agreement with your men?
A. To pay on the 20th.
Q. Did you pay them above the basis agreed upon last year for any
months?
A. Yes, sir; a good many months; I can scarcely 'tell which ones; in
August I paid at the rate of $5 50; I paid at the $5 basis when I know
coal did not average $5 in New York.
Q. How many months in 1870 did you pay above the basis?
A. I cannot tell.
<pb>
Q. Did you pay above the basis for six months?
A. I think I did; I am not positive.
Q. Are not your miners prevented from working sometimes by the mines
being flooded, or the breaking of shafts, machinery or engines?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Was not last year, taking the whole of it, an unusually good year?
A. No; I don't think it was.
Q. Was it not a good year for the operators?
A. No, sir; it was not.
Q. You did not make any money last year out of your business?
A. No, sir; my expenses were more than my income.
William Kendrick, re-called by Mr. Lamberton.
Q. Have you a tabulated statement of the wages of a number of col-
lieries?
A. I have; of twenty-seven.
Q. Have you that statement here?
A. I have.
Q. Produce it.
[Statement produced.]
Q. Who prepared that statement?
A. Col. Beath, secretary of the Anthracite Board of Trade.
Q. From what was it prepared?
A. From affidavits from twenty-seven collieries.
Q. Have you those affidavits here?
A. I have.
Q. Where are the collieries located?
A. In Schuylkill and Northumberland counties; I do not know whether
there are any from Columbia county or not.
Q. From your own knowledge, and from the information derived from
these affidavits, I want you to state what was the average rate of wages
earned per day?
A. When I was examined here last Thursday evening I made a statement
which I wish to correct; I stated that the average rate of wages earned in
these twenty-seven collieries was $3 62^; I see that it is $3 iS\; these are
miners working by contract.
Q. What was it in your own colliery?
A. In my own colliery, for the month of August, 1870, the average was
$2 88; that is the St. Clair shaft; for the month of September $2 63;
that is the average of the men working by contract; we have no report for
October; for the month of November it was $2 20.
Mr. Lamberton—We have these twenty-seven affidavits here; I suppose
they are not strictly evidence, but I offer them.
Objected to by Mr. Brockway.
Mr. Davis—I do not think the committee will receive them.
Mr. Brockway produces statement of the amount of work done by men
in witness's colliery, giving amount of earnings and expenses.
Witness—I recognize these as our statements.
By Mr. Brockway Q. Are those correct?
A. I don't know anything about that; these are only statements of the
men's work;' I have a receipt from each man.
Q. You don't know whether these are correct or not?
A. Not by looking at them here; I think they are.
[Offered in evidence by Mr. Brockway, and marked Ex. E.]
Q. There are two men to each of these?
A. Some of them, I suppose.
<pb>
A. Pardee, Jr., called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Where do you reside?
A. At Hazleton.
Q. Where are your collieries?
A. At Lattimer, in Luzerne county.
Q. How many men do you employ?
A. I think the average for last year will show from 125 to 150, all told;
that does not include the boys.
Q. How much coal do you ship in a year?
A. We shipped last year nearly 100,000 tons.
Q. How many months were you at work during the year lS'IO?
A. I think our colliery run 260 days.
Q. Did the suspension of the 1st of December affect you?
A. We had a suspension in September which was entirely local; it was
a demand made upon us for the discharge of men who did belong to the
Union.
Q. You were employing at that time men who did not belong to the
Union or W. B. A.?
A. We had a number who did not.
Q. And the strike in September was caused by your refusal to discharge
such men as did not belong to the Union?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How long did that strike continue?
A. We lost nearly a month.
Q. How many men had you employed that were said not to belong to
the Union?
A. I know that we had some twelve or fifteen men that did not belong
to it.
Q. Was that their sole ground of complaint?
A. The first intimation we had was a written notice from a committee
stating that if certain men who do not belong to the Union did not join in
a certain time, the work would be stopped; I have the notice here.
Q. Your colliery .was idle a month because you refused to discharge
men in your employ?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What was the result of the suspension?
A. The men went to work on the terms that they went out on.
Q. Did you discharge the men?
A. Not one.
Q. Had you any other suspension during last year?
A. Yes, sir; we had one other.
Q. When was that?
A. On the 1st of September; our boys struck.
Q. What was that for?
A. Because there was no fire in the breaker.
Q. Were the boys joined by the men?
A. They were sustained by the men.
Q. How long did you stop that time?
A. My impression is that we were out about ten days; I cannot speak
positively.
Q. The men were all the time idle for the reason you have given?
A. Yes, sir. .......
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. Do you mean that the men stopped along with the
boys?
<pb>
A. They all stopped; the work was suspended during those ten days.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. What were the losses that you sustained during
those two strikes? .
A. It cost us about $1,000 per month to stand idle.
Q. At one colliery?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How many collieries have you?
A. Only one in operation; we would have had another if the work had
.not been stopped.
Notices shown to witness.
Q. One of the notices produced is signed by John Archibald and John
Timmins—who are they?
A. Men in our employ, and delegated by the association to give us that
notice; I can prove by men on this floor thatf they belong to the associa-
tion. fc
Q. Another is signed by Edward Reilly—who is he?
A,. He was president of the Branch at that time; the other two are sim-
ply members.
Q. Branch of what?
A. That Branch association at Lattiiner.
Q. Were these men employed by you'!
A. Yes, sir; they brought that paper, and appeared personally.
Three notices offered in evidence by Mr. Lamberton, as follows:
Lattimer, September 7, 1870, )
Branch No. 2. j
Pardee Brothers & Co.:
Resolved, That we are ready to resume work on these conditions, as fol-
lows, viz: That you will not have any un-union men employed in or about
the breaker; also, if union men will come around that you will hire or em-
ploy these union men in the un-union men's places that is working under
your employ elsewhere.
Also, that we will not resume work so long as Sam. Klinger is under
your employment.
EDWARD RILEY,
WILLIAM HO WELLS,
ADAM SISSMAN,
Committee.
Lattimer, August 24, 1870.
Pardee Brothers & Co.: .-
Gentlemen :—You are hereby notified that in ten days from date the
members of this branch belonging to the Miners' and Laborers' association
will suspend work, unless the non-unionist men now employed in this branch
becomes members of the Miners' and Laborers' association.
JOHN ARCHIBALD,
JOHN TIMMINS,
Committee.
Lattimer, July 1, 1870.
Mr. M. W. Cooper:
Gentlemen :—You are hereby notified that in ten days from this date
the members of this branch belonging to the Miners' and Laborers' asso-
<pb>
ciation will suspend work, unless the non union men now emploj-ed in this
branch becomes members of this Miners' and Laborers' association.
EDWARD REILLY, President.
Lattimer Branch.
By Mr. Brockway.—Q. Are you a member of this association?
A. No, sir.
Q. How do you know, except by what they told you that they are mem-
bers?
A. That is what they told me; these men are in our employ; I asked
the men if those were their signatures; they said they were; I am ready
to swear to Reilly's signature; we have his signature on our books.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. Who is Samuel Klinger?
A. He is employed by us about the saw mill—sometimes about the
breaker.
Q. Was there any difficulty at any time during the year 1870 with those
employed by you as to the wages you were paying?
A. Not of any moment; nothing but what I could settle with them as
individuals.
By Mr. Brockway Q. You spoke about a strike in September, lasting
ten days; could the men have worked without the boys?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How?
A. There was ample opportunity for them to have blown the coal; the
men could have worked in the mines.
By Mr. Davis.—Q. How old were those boys?
A. From 14 to 17.
By Mr. Brockway—Q. And on a cold winter's day could a boy 10 or
12 years of age pick coal out in the open air?
A. On a cold winter's day we do not employ any boy 10 or 12 3'ears of age
out in the air; these boys are all employed in the breaker; this was the
first of September, and those boys were at the same time running about
barefooted.
Q. Don't you know from your own experience that miners are frequently
enabled to make larger wages by what they call squeezes—and don't that
account for the large wages sometimes?
A. No, sir; in our colliery we do not allow them to take advantage of
that.
Q. You take advantage of that?
A. No, sir; we do not take the coal out.
Q. When the miner gets the coal out does he not get the advantage of
it?
A. If he can get it out in a certain length of time; but if he takes three
months time for a few days' work, I do not see how he reaps any benefit.
Z. P. Boyer, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Are you a coal operator?
A. I was up to the 10th of this month.
Q. Are you a member of the Anthracite Board of Trade?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Whereabouts is your colliery?
A. My last one was at Phoenix Park; formerly at Trevorton.
Q. How much coal did you ship a year?
A. The last year I was at Trevorton I shipped 67,000 tons.
<pb>
Q. State any interference upon the part of your men in the management
of your colliery.
A. When I bought the property at Trevorton we did not have any asso-
ciation; they introduced it in May, 1869, I think, and from that time out
we had continual interferences, and their actions disgusted me so that I
sold my interest; after the basis was introduced they raised the wages;
I was notified by the members of the association to attend a meeting in the
school house, which I did, and they passed a resolution allowing the men
to mine only six wagons a day, thus reducing our production; we objected
to it, and the result was about five weeks' suspension.
Q. Because you refused to be dictated to as to the number cf wagons
that should be taken out, your men struck?
A. Yes, sir. It was necessary to take the coal out of No. 8 as fast as
possible, in order to save it; they called a meeting of the association, and
called attention to the fact that those men were taking too much coal out.
Q. Who took part in that meeting, and notified you of the action of the
association?
A. I was notified by Mr. Wright; he was present at the first meeting.
I was notified by Mr. John Smith, president of the association, that those
men were taking out too much coal, and they must reduce the production
from that vein down to 32 wagons a day; when the question arose whether
l had better lose the coal or pay 80 cents a wagon, I agreed to pay that;
the result was that the 32 wagons did not pay me; we could not take the
coal out rapidly enough and we lost the gangway; and it is estimated that
there were from 10,000 to 20,000 tons of coal in it at that time; we lost
that; it has never been taken out; that was in 1869.
Q. State whether there was any trouble about your buying powder from
a non-union man.
A. Yes, sir; we ordered some powder in Pottsville, a new kind of powder
introduced there, and sent it to Trevorton; the Dupont powder is consid-
ered as good as any in the country; right below Trevorton is a powder
mill which was worked at that time by a man who was working in accord
with the Union; we sent this powder from Pottsville up to the colliery, and
the men struck because we did not have this man's powder who was in
accord with the Union, and they would not work until I got that powder.
Q. State whether you had any suspension or strike in connection with
the sinking of a slope.
A. I did; I was sinking a slope, and the men were striking on the up-
per works, and because they were striking they passed a resolution that
the men at the slope must strike also; they notified the men that they must
quit, and they did.
Q. Had you any difficulty in regard to stopping an airway?
A. Yes, sir; I was driving an airway, and made a special contract with
a party—a member of the association; when they got it part of the way up
they quit driving.
Q. Did you have any difficulty in January on account of the wages?
A. Not specially on account of wages.
By Mr. Brockway.—Q. Had you any interference with your colliery
before the association was formed?
A. No, sir.
Q. How do you know when it was formed?
A. I was in the town of Trevorton the night the association was formed;
I know the party that came there to form it; his name was Tom Lewis; he
was a man l discharged.
Q. Were you present %
<pb>
A. No, sir.
Q. All you know is what you have heard?
A. Yes, sir, and the notice I saw the next morning.
Q. How do you know that this man Smith is presideat of the associa-
tion?
A. I know by the communications and the conversations I have had with
him; he presided at the meeting I attended.
Q. You speak about powder—are jrou a judge of powder?
A. I ought to be.
Q. Who furnishes the powder?
. A. The operators.
Q. Is there sufficient ventilation in your mines to take away the smoke?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did your men interfere in any way with your work except by refus-
ing to work at the wages you gave?
A. They interfered as I have described.
Q. They have not attempted to keep other men from working by physi-
cal force?
A. They have never attempted to hit any body in the head that I know of.
Q. How much do your wagons hold?
A. 87 cubic feet; the Phoenix park wagons are much larger; there are
two kinds of wagons at Trevorton; the slope wagons, I think, are 112 or
116 cubic feet.
Q. Was there a ton of coal in them?
A. Oh, yes, more than that; the Trevorton coal averages about 43 feet
to the ton. .
Q. When the price of coal is high you make money?
A. Oh, yes.
Q. Does the raise in freights diminish your profits?
A. They never raised the freights when I was mining at Trevorton.
Q. Does not that Dupont powder cause more suffocation in the mines
than any other?
A. No, sir.
Q. Would not the miners be supposed to know what injured them most?
A. That would depend whether they understood their physical condition
or not?
Q. Were you at a coal operators' meeting when the operators fought and
drew pistols on each other?
A. No, sir.
By Mr. White Q. Are you in the coal business now?
A. No, sir; not since the 10th of this month, and I do not expect to be
again; I have had sufficient experience.
Adjourned until half-past seven this evening.
EVENING SESSION.
The committee met at half-past seven o'clock.
Richard Sharpe re-called by Mr. Lambertrfn.
Q. Give us the number of each class, of men you had at the time of the
suspension and the wages you were paying them?
A. We had 78 miners on contract work; we were paying 65 cents per
toil.
Witness presented the following list of the men employed by hu com-
pany and their wages:
<pb>
Number of men employed by Sharpe, Weiss & Co., at Council Bidge col-
liery, in the month of January, 1871, at the time colliery was suspended
by order of the General Council of the W. B. A., with the rate of wages.
INSIDE OF THE MINES.
Per week.
78 miners at contract work, (by the ton or yard,)
5 do .. grading slopes after their contract was done $18 50
1 do..:....."....". 18 00
2 do .. (ordinary,) basis, $16 00 17 04
41 do ..laborers' do.. 13 20 14 00
1 do do. .extra hands 15 00
1 carpenter on repairs of road, schutes, &c., basis, $18 00 19 14
4 carpenters and helpers do.. 16 00 17 04
1 driver boss do.. 15 00 15 60
23 drivers and company laborers do.. 13 00 13 86
163
3 boys, (drivers,) 12 78
4 do do ..average 10 72
3 do. .doors, oiling cars, &c 8 81
5 do do.. .do.. .do 6 93
— 15
178
OUTSIDE HANDS.
12 mechanics and helpers, (average,)...
15 laborers, at
2 do
8 do
14 do
12 do . .old men picking slate
— 63
3 boys, picking slate, (average,)
9 do do
7 do do
28 do do
5 do do
— 52
115
MONTHLY MEN PAID FOE FULL TIME.
Per month.
17 engineers and firemen, (average,) $68 82
1 machinist, superint'g and repairing machinery, pumps, &c.. 100 00
*'(men) stable, watchman, despatchers, (average,) 56 00
2 ticket bosses
1 carpenter boss
1 outside superintendent
1 inside do ■.
Book-keeper
29
115 outside.
178 inside.
322
Per day of 10 hours.
$2 64
2 10
2 00
1 81
1 68
1 58
M6
75
68
60
50
<pb>
About one-fourth of above are boys and young men under 21 years of
age.
Miners at the time of suspension were paid $1 20 per car, equal to 65
cents per ton, where coal was mined with least labor. Where wheelbar-
rows or hand-cars were used, or any difficulty presented in the work, an
addition or allowance was made.
In 1869 the W. B. A. proposed to restrict the production of coal by al-
lowing a miner and his helper to load only twelve tons per day. At that
amount as a day's work when they suspended in January, 1871, and rate
per ton 65 cents, which we then paid, a day's work of miner and laborer
would be $7 80
1 day of laborer, then $2 33
A liberal allowance for powder, oil, &c 1 20
Leaves miner's net earnings 4 27
At the rate proposed by men for resumption, 85 cents per ton, the
day's work of 12 tons $10 20
1 day laborer $2 88
Powder, oil, &c 1 20
4 08
Leaving for miner 6 12
By Mr. Brockway Q.. Did not the miners pay these helpers out of this
sixty-five cents per ton?
A. Yes, sir; I allow for that in the statement.
Q. You deduct for dirt?
A. We do if the coal is very dirty.
Q. How much?
A. That is left to the judgment of the person in charge; it depends upon
how dirty it is.
Q. Is it arbitrary with the boss?
A. He is the umpire between us and the men.
Q. The boss may deduct whatever, in his judgment, he thinks is right?
A. Yes, sir; the M dockage" is not excessive.
Q. Has the miner anything to say as to the question of " dockage?''
A. No; they have not anything to do with the dockage, any more than
they are told the next morning when they come with their tickets whether
there has been anything docked or not.
Q. You count 2,240 pounds as a ton?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did the men demand .an increase beyond the basis; did they not want
a sliding scale?
A. Yes, sir; we offered a sliding scale.
Q. Did they demand anything beyond a basis*
A. We were not selling coal at the time; they demanded that they should
l>e paid upon a basis of $7 50 at Elizabethport; the basis then was $5.
Q. Their demand anything beyond that, except that it should be a slid-
ing scale?
A. The paper I have given you shows their demand.
Q. Who demanded this?
A. Their names are there; it is signed by the president and secretary of
the association.
10
<pb>
Q. What would you consider sufficient wages for an average miner at
the present rates of coal?
A. The rates we paid when we suspended; we could not afford to pay
them any more, at the price at which we were selling our coal when we
suspended; I think the wages we paid two months ago were sufficient.
Q. Do you think the miners should receive more when coal advances in
price than when it does not?
A. Yes, sir; we have always paid it.
Q. Do you believe in a basis?
A. Yes, sir; I believe the basis is fair.
Q. Do you believe that when the rates for coal, by the basis, go below a
point at which the miner cannot live, he should be compelled to take it?
A. That is for him to judge.
Q. Have you any stoves in the breaker in the winter time?
A. Yes, sir. •
Q. Do you consider them necessary'!
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you keep a store?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. The men deal there largely?
A. They do.
Q. You have a system of orders?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you before this association was established?
A. No, sir; the men are free to buy when and where they choose; that
has always been our rule; we pay them in cash when they want it—some-
times before they want it; I know some men that take their compensation
all in cash, and come to the store and buy goods as they want them. I
might correct a statement I made the other night in regard to percentage
on collections; we are compelled by the law of the State to collect the tax;
the men are at liberty to take their money and pay for their meat as they
use it; men sometimes take their money, and sometimes leave it; we have
paid them interest sometimes on their deposits.
J. B. Moorhead, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Where do you live?
A. My residence is in the city of Philadelphia.
Q. Where are you doing business?
A. I have an anthracite blast furnace on the Schuylkill, thirteen miles
above the city.
Q. How much coal do you use a year in that furnace?
A. About 15,000 tons.
Q. If you were compelled to blow out your furnace last year, state what
was the cause?
A. We blew out in April on account of a strike in the coal regions, which
may be very nice amusement for them up there, but it is death to us ; we
blew in in August; I spent about $22,000 in putting the furnace in repair.
Q. What effect have these frequent suspensions upon you?
A. They have such an effect that any man out of the business would keep
out; they destroy our business entirely; no capitalist is safe in investing
money under the uncertainties that we have been subjected to for the last
three or four years.
Q. You are filling contracts now that you have made for the delivery of
iron?
<pb>
A. Yes, sir; we usually sell from three to five months ahead.
Q. In filling those contracts at the present price of coal, are you making
or losing money?
A. We are losing about $7 00 a ton on every ton of pig iron we are mak-
ing now; we are making from 28 to 30 tons now.
Q. What is your judgment, as a man engaged in the manufacture of
iron, of the policy of the railroad companies in increasing the .tolls.
A. I think the policy was a proper one; it is one that I advised, and al-
though I am a sufferer I sustain their course, as appearing to be the only
remedy, to show the miners that there was another power besides theirs;
there must be some power exercised somewhere to put a stop to these con-
stant strikes in the mines; we want cheap coal to encourage manufacturing
and provide labor for those outside of the mines.
Q. Then apart from the money that goes into the treasury of the rail-
road companies by this increase, you think it is good poilcy?
A. I think it is; I think the railroad companies are very heavy sufferers;
what they want is large tonnage; they cannot get that tonnage if they can-
not get coal.
Q. And you cannot run your furnaces at a profit if you cannot get coal?
A. No, sir.
By Mr. Brockway—Q. Have the tolls been increased on limestone on
your road?
A. I cannot say; I do not carry any; I get it by wagons.
Q. Do you mine the ore in your own neighborhood?
A. Partly.
Q. Has it been increased on that which you get?
A: I do not know that it has; we don't get but little; I do not think it
has been increased.
Q. Then your theory is that this policy of the railroads is right, in order
to crush this Workingmen's association?
A. I think so.; I think there has got to be some power from some quar-
ter to arrest this constant striking and this constant demand upon the coal
operators.
Q. Do you think that was the object of the road in raising their freights?
A. I presume it was; I have not heard them say so.
Q. What do you pay a ton for coal that you are using now?
A. $9 50,I think, for lump coal.
Q. What is the freight on your coal?
A. The freight is about $5 65.
Q. How much did the coal cost before the raise of freights?
A. About $4 50.
Q. Then the difference in the price is caused by the raise in freights?
A. About $1 30 on coal, and the balance on freights.
Q. If you were getting the coal on the old rates could you not make
money?
A. We could for a little while; this strike would come again; if they
had not raised the tolls and they had commenced work I have no doubt we
■would have had a strike.
Q. If the additional tolls had not been put on could you not make money
at the present prices of iron?
A. No, sir; not to fill my orders.
Q. If you had not made contracts at long distances would you not have
Made money by paying present prices and tolls?
A. I suppose I could have made a very small profit.
<pb>
Q. What does it cost you to manufacture a ton of iron at the present
time—take No. 2 pig?'
A. From $26 00 to $32 00.
Q. What do you pay a ton for iron ore?
A. Some costs $7 50 and some $3 50.
Q. What does it cost you a ton for limestone?
A. About $1 30.
Q. You say the railroad is the sufferer—and, therefore, you sympathize
with the railroad?
A. So much so that I am willing to bear a share of the loss with them;
I think they are doing about what is right; I approve of their course.
Q. Carrying the present amount of coal that they are doing don't you
know that they will make more than the entire cost of operating their
road—the Reading road?
A. I know they will not; I suppose they are not paying half their expenses.
Q. You say these miners are to blame for these strikes?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You do not think the operators are to blame?
A. I think they have been in the earlier days, but not for the late strikes;
tbese miners have been getting what they demanded because one operator
could not stand out against them. They yielded until they could stand it
no longer. Now there has been a combination between the operators and
railroad men to stop it; I would like to seethe militia called out to protect
honest miners who wanted to work.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. If the minimum price of coal at Port Carbon
was $3,.and the tolls on the Reading railroad were the same they were be-
fore they were advanced in the middle of January, could 3'ou pay those
prices and make money in the manufacture of iron?
A. We could not at the old prices; I could fill my orders and make money;
what we want is cheap coal; the prosperity of the country demands it and
labor demands it.
By Mr. Brock way.—Q. How cheap do you want it?
A. $2 50 is the highest it should ever reach in the coal regions.
Q. How high a fignre ought tolls to reach?
A. They ought not to be over $1 75.
CJ. Have they ever been that low on the Reading railroad'(
A. I think they have.
<l. Do you not know that some of the chief stockholders in that road
have purchased large tracts of coal lands in Trevorton?
A. No, sir; there is an English gentleman interested in them.
Q. Cheap coal means cheap labor?
A. No, sir; it gives labor; it furnishes labor to the country; we want
labor outside of the mines; give us cheap coal and we will find labor for all
the men in the country.
By Mr. Davis.—Do you think a forced submission in any contest is likely
to be a permanent one?
A. That is pretty difficult to answer; l think this thing has got into a
very ugly shape; I think labor is more to blame than capital; I have been
employing labor all my life in iron woiks; I have never known labor to be
severely depressed except when business was depressed; when the employer
cannot make enough to pay his men perhaps he must oppress them.
By Mr. Petrikin Q. Why would you call out the militia?
A. These miners do not seem to be inclined to let anybody else mine,
coal but themselves; I want every man to have a chance to work in this
mining region; a good man is chained fast to a scallawag and has no
chance to raise; let him be ever so ambitious, he is tied down.
\
<pb>
H9
By Mr. Brockway—Q. Do you believe in free trade in iron as you be-
lieve in free trade in labor?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did you ever increase the wages of your men unless they demanded
it?
A. I have never had a strike; I have paid my men well.
Q. Have you ever voluntarily advanced your wages when the price of
iron is advanced?
A. I have frequently offered more, when I could afford to do it; but I do
not ask my men to share my losses now; I am loosing $7 on every ton.
By Mr. White Q. Where do you get your coal from?
A. Schuylkill; we are getting it now from Lykens valley.
By Mr. Brockway Q. I presume the information about miners not let-
ting others work up there you obtained from what others say?
A. I have it from general reports; I know it to be so.
David Thomas, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Are you engaged in the manufacture of iron?
A. I am, sir.
Q. Whereabouts?
A. On the Lehigh river, 21 miles above Easton.
Q. What company?
A. The Thomas iron company.
Q. How many furnaces have you!
A. Six.
Q. Any rolling mills?
A. There is a company which I represent that has a couple of rolling
mills.
Q. How many of those six furnaces are now in blast?
A. One.
Q. Why are not the other five in blast?
A. Because we have no coal.
Q. How much coal do you use in a year?
A. We used in the furnaces last year 150,000 tons; in the mills a little
over 25,000.
Q. Can you run your furnaces successfully or profitably with recurring
strikes in the coal regions?
A. No, sir.
Q. What effect have those strikes?
A. In the first place they require us to keep a large stock of coal, which
involves considerable expenditure; then if the strike continues longer than
four weeks we iave to blow out, at great loss.
Q. What were you using in the rolling mills?
A. Part anthracite and part bituminous coal.
Q. What are you now using?
A. Bituminous coal altogether.
Q. If the strike continues and you desire to manufacture iron, what
change would you have to make, and what kind of coal will you have to
use?
A. If we change we will have to move our works to where the soft coal
is; if we keep in blast we would have to change our location and change
the grates.
By Mr. Brockway—Q. Don't you occasionally blow out when there is
no strike?
<pb>
A. When we want to repair; but we don't blow out five furnaces at a time.
Q. Don't you blow out when the price of iron is very low?
A. Yes, sir; there are many things that cause us to blow out, but we
only blow out one at a time generally.
Q. When the price of iron gets very low you blow out your furnaces?
A. We have not done so since 1842 and 1843, when iron was low.
Q. What do you pay a ton for coal for this one furnace?
A. $4 75 at Mauch Chunk.
Q. What do you pay for its transportation?
A. I am not positive; I think $1 04.
Q. What is the distance?
A. 26 miles.
Q. What did the freight used'to be?
A. 61 or 63 cents.
Q. Where do you get your bituminous coal from?
A. From Broad Top, Kittanning, Snow Shoe and a number of other
places.
Q. Has the freight been raised on bituminous coal?
A. Yes, sir, but very trifling.
Q. Is it raised to the same extent as on other coal?
A. No, sir.
Q. Since the last suspension the rates on bituminous coal have been
raised?
A. I will not say since the last suspension; perhaps since the 1st of De-
, cember.
Q. Had any of your furnaces blown out before the 15th of February,
1871?
A. Yes, sir; three of them; two have been blown out since.
Q. Have you any interest in the Thomas coal company, Schuylkill oounty?
A. No, sir.
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. Were you making or losing money on your iron
at the time you blew out?
A. We did not make any money last year; we are now losing over six
dollars a ton.
Samuel Fulton, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Are you engaged in the manufacture of iron?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Whereabouts f
A. Conshohocken.
Q. How much coal do you use in a year?
A. 30,000 or 40,000 tons.
Q. What effect has a suspension in the coal regions upon you?
A. It destroys us; it destroys the business.
Q. Are you making iron now?
A. I have one furnace in blast now.
Q. How many furnaces have you?
A. We have two, and a foundry, which consumes about the same as the
furnaces; one furnace is out of blast, and work at the foundry is reduced.
Q. When did you go out of blast?
A. Last week.
Q. Where had you been getting your coal before the suspension?
A. We had a stock that lasted us pretty well; we had been buying some
wherever we could get it.
<pb>
Q. What did you pay for the stock you had laid in?
A. About $4 30, delivered at the works.
Q. What was the price of it at Port Carbon?
A. $2 25, I think, or $2 50.
Q. Then the toll was about $2 08?
A. The tolls were $1 85 or $1 90—$2 08 to Philadelphia.
Q. What effect have these suspensions on you?
A. The effect is of course to stop the works when we have no coal; we
have lost $12,000 or $15,000 a year since that thing commenced; our busi-
ness is in such a state that we cannot do anything; these strikes are en-
tirely destructive to any kind of business.
Q. They make the manufacture of iron a very hazardous business?
A. Yes, sir; so much so that I don't think any one would go into it.
Q. Large capital is required to lay in a stock of coal, in ord,er not to be
compelled to blow out?
A. Yes, sir; we have to keep a large amount of coal, which is wasting
all the time.
Q. Outside of the amount of money paid to the railroad company by
the increase of tolls, this increase being rendered necessary by the decrease
in the tonnage, what do you think of the policy of the railroad company?
A. I don't like it very well, but, at the same time, I cannot but say that
they are perfectly justified in protecting themselves.
Q. It is a matter of self defence?
A. That is the way I look at it; I would rather, of course, that they
would have arranged the matter in some other way; it has cost us some
thousands a week; I say the railroad company is justified.
By Mr. Brockway Q. Have you ever complained of the rates of toll
on the Reading road before this?
A. Many a time.
Q. What were they when you complained?
A. It was a matter of ten or fifteen cents that we complained of.
Q. Were they less than two cents per ton per mile?
A. Yes, sir; I think so.
Q. If you complained when they were less than that, haven't you reason
to complain when they are more than six and a half cents?
A. Yes, sir, if we thought they were going to last.
Q. Have you any special assurance that they are not going to last?
A. No, sir; I don't think they will.
Q. What does a ton of coal cost you at the mines now?
A. We are paying $4 00.
Q. What is the freight from the mines to your place now?
A. I don't know exactly; I think about $5 50.
Q. The freight is $1 50 more than the cost of the coal at the mines?
A. Yes, sir; the price varies.
Q. Did you ever hear the president of the Reading road say he had a
method of stopping these strikes in the future by increasing the freights?
A. Never; I hope he may succed in stopping them.
Samuel Lewis, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Are you engaged in the iron business?
A. Yes, sir, at the Allentown iron works.
Q. How many furnaces?
A. Four.
Q. Are they in blast now?
<pb>
A. One of them.
Q- How much coal do you use in a year?
A. When the furnaces are all in operation 80,000 tons.
Q. What effect have these suspensions in the coal regions upon you?
A. We have to blow out some of our stacks.
Q. You have heard other gentlemen testify as to the effect of these sus-
pensions; I suppose the same effect is produced upon your establishment?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. These suspensions require the expenditure of a large amount of capi-
tal, increasing the cost of iron?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. If a railroad company, as a matter of self-defence, puts up the toll on
account of the decreased tonnage, what is your judgment as to that policy.
[Objected to. Objections sustained.]
Richard Sharpe, re-called by Mr. Lamberton.
Q. What is the actual cost of mining a ton of coal, and putting it on
the car?
A. Fifty-five cents in the large vein was the basis price for the miner;
that was when the vein was worked to the best advantage; the allowances
and all the other labor would make it about 65 cents; then there are the
supplies, feeding of mules, and many things, which I cannot name, which
1 would put at an average of 30 cents; then it costs a large amount of
money to sink slopes; then there are expenses at Elizabethport.
Q. What does it foot up?
A. Within 5 cents of $5.
Q. That is on the $5 basis?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Brockway Don't you pay more for mining your coal than most
of the operators in your region, because your vein is smaller?
A. We do; the price I have given is for the small vein; we could not
send coal to Elizabethport, and save ourselves, at $5 a ton and pay the
price we do; our trade is principally with the consumers, and, therefore,
we save the 25 cents commission at Elizabethport.
Q. Is it the policy of the operators to work when coal is less than $5 in
New York?
A. It is, if we can sell it somewhere else.
Q. When coal is selling at Elizabethport for $5, can you operate your
mines at what you propose as a basis, at a profit?
A. It gives a very small profit to send it to Elizabethport.
Q. Is it not for your interest that the price of coal to consumers should
increase?
A. No, sir.
Q. You don't want it to increase?
A. No, sir; we propose to have an equal price; fluctuations are very
injurious to ourselves, the workmen and consumers.
Q. What figure would you put it at at Elizabethport?
A. We have no trade there, although our wages are based upon that
price; we were selling to the furnaces at Mauch Chunk at $3, at the time
we stopped; at the terms we proposed it would leave us a bare working
profit.
Q. Do not your veias pitch more than they do in Schuylkill and some
parts of Luzerne, and is it not more expensive to mine them?
A. I think in Schuylkill many of them pitch more than ours; our heaviest
pitch is about 30 or 35 degrees.
<pb>
Robert H. Sayre re-called by Mr. Lamberton.
Q. In whose cars was the coal carried on your road?
A. The cars of the Lehigh Valley railroad company, and conneciing
companies.
Q. Not in the cars of the operators?
A. No, sir.
Q. You furnished the motive power, the roadway and the cars?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Brockway.—Q. What dividend did you declare on your capital
stock last year?
A. Ten per cent.
Q. Is that all your road earned?
A. There was a small balance over; I don't recollect what it was; our
report will show it.
John Brisbin, being re-called by Mr. Lamberton, testified as follows:
Mr. Bound testified to a charge of twenty-five cents a ton for the trans-
portation of limestone for a certain distance, which was apparently an
over-charge; I was present at the time the bargain was made; the amount
we had a right to charge was twenty cents a ton; it was agreed with Mr.
M'Kelvey that we should have five cents a ton for switching and delivering
it at his furnaces; he stated that it had cost him ten or fifteen cents a ton
for doing it; and he would allow us five cents a ton for doing it.
By Mr. Brockway Q. Have you got the same agreement with Paxton's
company, at Bloomsburg?
A. I made no bargain with them.
Q. Do you know what they charge them?
A. No, sir.
Q. Don't you know that they charged more for a ton of freight from
Rupert to Bloomsburg than to Philadelphia?
A. I do not.
Q. Have you increased your capital stock?
A. We have increased from time to time as we have expended money
for construction purposes; we have never issued a dollar of stock except
for money expended for construction purposes.
[Paper shown witness.]
Q. That is a paper I have from the Auditor General's office—is that cor-
rect?
A. Any report we have made is correct.
The paper was read as follows:
Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad Company, )
General Office, 26 Exchange Place, !.■
New York, May 24, 1866. )
Sir :—In compliance with the request contained in your favor of the 27th
March last, that I should make a report showing how and when the capital
stock of this company was increased from $5,185,200 to $10,247,050, etc.,
I beg leave to state that the said increase of stock, amounting in the ag-
gregate to $5,061,850, was issued as follows:
July 20, 1863 $513,050
January 4, 1864 1,134,350
April 13, 1864 300
June 6, 1864 50
November 3, 1864 3,414,100
$5,061,859
<pb>
That of this amount $350 was issued for right of way, $66,000 to take
the place of the same amount of stock forfeited and surrendered, and $1,-
482,500 in place of that amount of mortgage bonds taken up and cancelled,
leaving $3,513,000 as the amount issued to represent a like amount that
had been expended for construction and in the purchase of additional
lands and property; that the stock thus issued, with the exception of the
$350, (paid for right of way,) represents the earnings for the years 1863,
1864 and preceding years, and was distributed pro rata among the stock-
holders; that of the railroads operated and used by this company in the
acquisition of said earnings, one hundred and twelve (112) miles are in the
State of Pennsylvania, sixty-seven (67) miles are in the State of New Jer-
sey, and one hundred and fifty (150) miles are in the State of New. York.
Very respectfully,
A. J. ODELL, Treasurer.
To the Honorable the Auditor General of Pennsylvania,
Harrisburg, Pa.
State of New York,
County and City of New York.
 
Before me, a commissioner appointed by the Governor of the State of
Pennsylvania, in and for the said city, personally appeared John Brisbin,
president, and A. J. Odell, treasurer, of the Delaware, Lackawanna and
Western railroad company, and in due form of law made oath, that the
facts stated in the foregoing communication from said Odell to the Auditor
General of the State of Pennsylvania, are true to the best of their know-
ledge and belief.
J. BRISBIN, President.
A. J. ODELL, Treasurer.
Sworn and subscribed before me,)
this 25th day of May, 1866. j
WM. WALTER PHELPS,
Commissioner for Pennsylvania, in New York.
[Seal.] [5 cents, U. S. revenue.]
Auditor General's Office, )
Harrisburg, March 24, 1871. J
I hereby certify that the within and foregoing is a true copy of the
original remaining on file in this department.
Witness my hand and the seal of office,"^
the day and year aforesaid. )
J. P. HARTRANPT, Auditor General.
Witness These increases that have been reported to the Auditor Gen-
eral are correct; we never watered the stock.
Q. What dividend did you declare last year on your capital stock?
A. Ten per cent.
Q. You have not declared more than ten per cent. for five years?
A. We gave to the stockholders at one time a stock dividend; I don't re-
collect what the amount was; for many years we made no dividends.
Q. You did not declare a twenty per cent. dividend last year?
A. No, sir, nor the year before; I think one year we did declare a twentj'
per cent. dividend.
Q. Don't you own three-fourths of the mining operations around Scran-
ton?
<pb>
A. It is impossible for me to tell what proportion we own; we own a
large amount of coal lands and a large number of collieries in the vicinity
of Scranton; my impression is that we do not own three-fourths; I should
think we owned a little more than half. I think we mine a little more than
half of the coal we transport; the rest we purchase.
Adjourned until to-morrow afternoon at half-past two.
Harrisburg, March 22, 1871.
Committee met at half-past two P. M.
John Brisbin, re-called by Mr. Brockway.
Q. Does the statement made to the Auditor General by your company, in
1869, of the amount of anthracite coal shipped, include all the anthracite
coal you shipped or only what was mined by your company?
A. I would not undertake to say without seeing the report.
Q. Was there not a three months' suspension in 1869?
A. There was a suspension but not for three months.
Q. Has not your company, in making this return for 1869, included all
the anthracite coal they carried in the months named?
A. I presume so, unless there has been some error in their return.
Q. What is the average distance that you transport coal?
A. About two-thirds of the coal goes south from Scranton towards tide-
water; about one-third goes north.
Q. You have a ninety foot grade?
A. No, sir; our maximum grade is assumed to be seventy-five feet to the
mile.
Q. How many tons do you carry to a train on an average, say from
Scranton to the Water Gap?
A. You could not make an average, because from Scranton for twenty
miles we have a heavy grade, where we take about one hundred and fifty
tons with one locomotive; for the balance of the distance we take about
three hundred tons.
Q. You did not take into your account to the Auditor General the roads
leased by you in New York and New Jersey?
A. I presume not; I cannot pretend to say how that report was made up,
because for the past three or four years those reports have not come within
my charge; when I made them up I reported only the business in Penn-
sylvania; they might include some business in the other States.
Q. What do you pay the Jersey Central for carrying coal in your cars?
A. Until the beginning of this year we paid them 1TS5 cents per ton per
mile, in gold, and we paid also the expenses of brakemen, so that they
furnish simply motive power and track; they never furnish any cars; we
now pay 1^ cents per ton per mile in currency, when gold is not above 15;
if gold goes above 15 then we pay such percentage upon the lj cents per
mile as gold goes above 15.
Q. The roads have a basis then?
A. So far as gold is concerned.
By Mr. Hall Q. How did they come to make a reduction?
A. The rate of lT5g was fixed at a time when coal and everything was very
high; it was during the war.
Q. When was this change made?
A. The change took place the 1st of July, 1870.
Q. When was the agreement made?
<pb>
A. I cannot tell you positively.
By Mr. Brockway Q. What proportion of mileage is allowed in your
report as being run by coal trains, as from Scranton to tide-water i
A. It is impossible for me to answer; the distances vary.
Q. Did you own the Syracuse road in 1869?
A. No, sir; but we have had a trackage contract with them for many
years, and the mileage of our coal trains, I think, is in that report; we
sent, I think, about-two-thirds of the coal south.
Q. What is the effect of the raise of coal rates on your road upon small
operators?
A. It has no effect at all that I am aware of?
Q. Can you not more successfully compete than the small operators.
owning, as you do, more than half the mining operations in that valley,
and owning the road?
A. That depends entirely upon the freights that we should charge; we
keep our accounts as between the transportation department and the coal
department, as if we were dealing with an outside party; the coal depart-
ment as a general rule has fallen in debt.
By Mr. Hall Q. Would it not have fallen in debt a great deal more if
you made them pay four cents a mile?
A. Yes, sir; in regard to the individual operators I may state that there
are at Scranton two parties, who have been in the habit for years of min-
ing coal for domestic purposes there; they are the only parties that have
continued to mine coal since the strike, or who have wanted any coal trans-
ported, and none of the parties from whom we purchased coal have been
mining or asked for any transportation during this strike; these others are
little one horse concerns.
Q. Do you call George Coray's establishment a little concern?
A. No, but they have not been at work during the strike, or offering us
any transportation.
Q. Can they work and compete successfully with you with rates at four
cents per mile?
A. Of course not; nobody can pay four cents per ton per^mile; we never
thought of charging it when anybody was shipping coal.
Q. What is your object in making the charge?
A. It is simply this; we let Mr. Tripp go into one of our collieries in
order to get out coal to relieve the pressure for domestic purposes alonji
our line; our superintendent at Scranton said they wanted to ship some
coal, and advised the president that they could work at five cents a ton;
the president sent word to charge four cents a ton.
Q. The charge of four cents a ton would be really prohibitory as to do-
ing business?
A. It would be really prohibitory as a through rate at ordinary times;
we never had any such rates except what I stated—to local points.
By Mr. Brockway.—Q. Is not the tendency of the increase of tolls to
throw the small operators into the hands of the company?
A. The increase of tolls since the strike has had no such effect whatever,
because nobody has offered to work except, those I have named, or indi-
cated to us that they wanted to work.
Q. You do not care about their working do you?
A. We don't care, so far as we are concerned, whether anybody is work-
ing, and we don't propose to work until this question is settled upon a
basis that we regard as just.
Q. You don't care whether the others work or not?
A. No, sir.
<pb>
Q. Does not your charter restrict you to 2,000 acres of coal land?
A. We have a right, originally, to hold 2,000 acres of coal lands; then
by virtue of an act of Assembly we came possessed of the right to merge
what was known as the Keyser Valley company into our company; that
company had the right to hold 3,000 acres of coal lands; then by virtue of
subsequent legislation we became possessed of the right to merge into out-
company any coal or iron company, or any company having mining rights;
by virtue of that legislation we merged into our company other companies
which, in the aggregate, possessed the right to possess 15,000 acres; hence
it is that the right inheres in us to hold about 15,000 acres of coal lands.
Q. This right will appear on the face of the statutes that you are going
to give me a memorandum of?
A. I can give you those; all those are found in the office of the Secre-
tary of State.
Q. Have you shipped other coal than that mined by yourselves at a
greater rate than two cents per ton per mile, which you have purchased
from other parties—from Scranton to Elizabethport?
A. That which we purchase from other parties we treat as our own coal;
we buy it in the cars.
Question repeated.
A. We never did until we were relieved from that prohibition; so long
as that prohibition was in existence we did not charge more than two cents
per ton per mile for the transportation of anthracite coal southward from
Scranton, unless we got more than that by virtue of a sliding scale con-
tract.
Q. I ask whether you have done so within the last Ave years t
A. If we transported coal, other than under the sliding scale, we did
not charge more than two cents per ton per mile for motive power and
roadway.
Q. Have you from 1865 to the present time?
A. I guess after that prohibition was repealed we may have charged
more; I will not say positively; I know we had certain contracts for trans-
porting at a fixed rate, and at another time at a sliding scale; I think in
some instances we charged more than two cents per ton per mile after the
prohibition was taken off.' *
Q. In increasing your capital stock, was it done by the earnings of the
road?
A. Sometimes we did; sometimes the earnings of the road represented
it and sometimes they did not.
Q. How much of your stock has been increased by the earnings of your
road? ,
A. I cannot tell.
Q. Can you furnish us with a statement of it?
A. I presume that the treasurer can give you a statement of the whole
thing from the books.
Q. All the money that you made upon your road above the dividends did
you put into the stock of your road or not?
A. Not always.
Q. Did you at any time?
A. Yes, sir; at different times.
Q. When?
A. Whenever we increased the capital stock we usually increased it pretty
nearly up to the amount that we had expended for construction purposes.
Q. Was that amount that you expended for construction purposes the
earnings of the road?
<pb>
A. Not always; sometimes we expended more for construction purposes
than we earned.
Q. In the last five years how much was the increase?
A. I would not undertake to state; the treasurer can tell you all about it.
Q. What was the capital stock five years ago?
A. I won't undertake to state without the papers; whatever is stated in
the railroad repqrt is correct; if I take the report I will swear from the
report and not from my own knowledge. [Looking at report.] The report
states that in 1869 the capital stock was $14,100,600.
Q. What was it the next year—1870?
A. The next report shows $18,808,850.
Q. Does the Auditor General's report show correctly the other years?
A. I presume so; they are all sworn to—some of them by me.
Q. There is an increase of nearly $5,000,000—how was that increase
made?
A. It was made by the issue of stock to represent money that had been
expended for construction purposes.
Q. And where did that money come from, for construction purposes?
A. A portion of it was from earnings and a portion of it came from stock,
issued and allotted to the stockholders at par, in order to raise the money;
that is my recollection.
Q. What proportion from earnings and what proportion from stock?
A. I cannot state.
Q. How far back did that go for the earnings?
A. I could not say; several years; perhaps three or four.
Q. The earnings then distributed ran back several years?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What was the stock of the road selling for at the time these stock-
holders got this stock at par?
A. Well, our stock for some years past has been vibrating between 103
and 110; par is 100.
Q. Did the stockholders get this stock at par in virtue of their being
stockholders?
A. Yes, sir; it was offered to all the stockholders pro rata.
Q. The property wal increased in value by the construction?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. They got their increase of that value in future dividends?
A. As stockholders, of course whatever benefits were put upon the road
inured to the benefit of the stockholders.
Q. The old stockholders are the men who enjoy these privileges?
A. The old and the new, too.
Q. Were there any new?
A. Oh, yes, our stock changes hands.
Q. Did any man take that stock unless he had stock at that time?
A. No, sir; of course he could not have it.
By Mr. Brockway.—Q. If the individual operators will pay two cents
per ton per mile can they mine coal and sell it at Elizabethport, at an aver-
age of $4 15, without actual loss?
A. That depends upon the price they pay the miners.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Suppose they paid the miners at just the lowest wages
you ever heard of?
A. Then they could ship coal and make money.
Q. Could they at four cents a ton per mile?
A. Of course not.
<pb>
Q. Was the average of your sales for the last three months over $4 15?
A. I cannot tell you; at our last auction sale it was $3 98.
Q. Was it not impossible for individual operators to compete with your
sales without losing money?
A. That would depend upon what they paid for transportation; nobody
has asked us to ship; we would be glad to have a tonnage for a less price.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. You have stated that four cents per mile would
be prohibitory at the ordinary prices of coal; is it prohibitory, or was
there any coal to be shipped to get those rates?
A. All the coal that is mined in the vicinity of Scranton that is wanted
to be sent over our roads is sent, and the parties are making a great deal
of money out of it.
Q. Then it is not prohibitory?
A. Not at the present rates of coal.
Q. Can you state now for how many years you have been paying ten
per cent.?
A. I would not state positively, but my recollection would be since 1861,
with the exception of one year; we paid ten per cent., but not always in
cash; sometimes in the stock of other corporations which we held; I don't
think that, prior to 1861, we paid our stockholders any dividend at all; all
profits went into construction.
By Mr. Brockway.—Q. Do you know what the present average of the
price of coal is at Elizabethport?
A. I could not state definitely; I reckon it is worth $9 00 a ton.
Q. You do not say that at the present prices of coal and paying the pre-
sent rates of freight, the operator could make money?
A. Yes, sir; I speak of shipping to the different points along the line;
nobody has shipped to Elizabethport; if the rate was anything else, there
would not be a pound shipped that is not shipped now; we are taking all
the coal the miners produce; the miners say they won't go to work unless
we pay them their price.
Q. Don't you know that your company refused to take cars from Sha-
mokin to Northumberland?
A. I guess we have no road from Shamokin to Northumberland?
Q. In order to ship to certain places they have to" ship over your road,
but you won't take any cars—is it not so?
A. I don't know of any such thing; I never heard of it before.
Thomas Waddell, re-called by Mr. Lamberton.
The following paper was shown witness:
Basis of agreement between Mr. Tompkins and the miners and laborers of
his collieries, in district No. 1, Pittston.
We hereby agree that the prices for mining coal from the 12th day of
the month of July, 1869, shall be one-eighth, or 12^ per cent., of the
average wholesale or cargo prices of coal per ton, in the markets of Eliza-
bethport or Hoboken, for mining top and bottom coal of the large veins,
and mode of working, to be paid in the same proportion as before; ad-
vances and reductions at the same rate, to be given at every period of 50
cents. Be it understood that the minimum price for mining is to be the
rate at $5 in the market.
(Signed) A. TOMPKINS,
In behalf of the operators.
(Signed) H. W. EVANS,
ROBERT ANDERSON,
In behalf of the miners.
<pb>
By Mr. Lambertctn.—Q. Was the agreement you made with your men
similar to that?
A. Yes, sir; as near as I can recollect.
By Mr. Brockway.—Q. What was the agreement you made with your
men in 1869?
A. When coal was $5 00 at Elizabethport I was to pay them 62i cents.
Q. What was the thickness of the vein you worked?
A. From ten to twelve feet.
Q. How many tons a day is the work of two men?
A. Ten (10) tons.
Q. How many cars could they load in a day?
A. Four (4) cars.
Q. If a car comes up under weight it is docked?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How much is lost per day?
A. I could not tell you; no good miner need lose anything; we don't
pay for dirt.
Q. Ten tons would be $6 75 per day?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. One-third of that would be $2 25?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. That is the price your men worked on basis?
A. Yes, sir; we have nothing to do with the laborer.
Q. Do you consider that the amount of labor done by two men in a
chamber worth what they get?
A. Yes, sir; I am satisfied or I would not pay it.
Q. Do you consider that there was anything unreasonable in the last
agreement you had?
A. No, sir.
Q. Was there any trouble between you and your men?
A. No, sir; all I know about it is that the General Council told them
to strike on the 10th of January.
Q. You don't think that the price of freights had anything to do with
it?
A. No, sir. i
Q. Were they not prepared to go to work on the 15th of February,?
A. They told me so.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. Why didn't they? \
A. I could not work. >
Q. Why? i
A. Because I could not pay the prices they wanted; I had made ipon-
tracts; I would have lost on every ton. ^
By Mr. Hall.—Q. What would it cost you to get a ton of coal from th*re
to New York? \
A. I don't know; from Penn Haven to Elizabethport it was $i 88. i
Q. Had those rates anything to do with your inability to deliver coal 11
A. No, sir.
Q. Would they if they had been twice as high?
A. No, sir.
Q. Where had you been shipping coal to when you did ship'!
A. From Pittston to Baltimore and Buffalo.
Q. What did you pay from Pittston to Baltimore?
A. I think $2 80 by canal.
Q. What did you pay by railroad?
A. I have not shipped.
1
<pb>
Q. What would it cost you now to ship by railroad''.
A. I don't know.
Q. How far is it from where you ship to Baltimore?
A. About two hundred miles.
By Mr. Brockway Do you think $5 a day is too much for a good miner?
A. I think it is greater than the coal trade can stand.
By Mr. Lamberton—Q. You know no other reason why the men stopped
than that an order was issued by the General Council to stop work?
A. I know of nothing else.
Q. When you were told that the tolls had been put up on the Lehigh
Valley railroad or Pennsylvania and New York canal, did you want to send
any coal to market?
A. When the notice came out that the men were to resume work on the
15th of February, in looking over the markets I could see that we could
not work; I went to the Lehigh "Valley office and saw the tolls, and thought
it was perfectly right; I thought it would bring the men and operators to
a better understanding, and ultimately result better for us.
Q. The increase of tolls had nothing to do with your shipping?
A. No, sir; if the canal opens to-morrow I cannot start, because I can-
not pay the miners the prices they want for a basis.
By Mr. Hall—Q. What was the basis on which the miners had agreed
to resume on the 15th?
A. I do not know; they never told me.
Q. Were you by that agreement to stop if coal went below $5 00?
A. No, sir; I lost on the coal I shipped in January.
Q. If there was a bargain with the miners, under which they suspended
work, and they afterwards agreed to go to work without any new contract,
would they not have worked under the old contract with you?
A. We have a contract between us to this day; they stopped on the old
contract.
Q. If the miners had gone to work on the 15th of February would they
not have gone to work under the old contract? ,
A. They would have done it; I could not work under it.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. You stated whilst that contract was in force
they did stop?
A. Yes, sir.
John Siney, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. Where do you live?
A. St. Clair, Schuylkill county.
Q. What position do you hold in the W. B. A.?
A. President of Schuylkill county.
Q. Who has custody of the books and papers belonging to the district
of which you are president?
A. I do not preside over that district; I preside over the executive
board of the county.
Q. Who has the minutes and resolutions of the executive board of the
county?
A. The secretary.
Q. Who is the secretary?
A. Mr. Corbit.
Q. Has he been in attendance before this committee 1
A. Yes, sir; he is here now.
11
<pb>
Q. Do you know whether he has any of the books or papers along with
him?
A. I believe he has got the minutes.
Q. Have you any official organ of the W. B. A. in Schuylkill county—
any newspaper?
A. No, sir; it is not owned by the W. B. A.
Q. I did not ask ypu that; I asked you if that association had an organ;
an official newspaper?
A. I scarcely know how to answer that question; the paper is owned by a
company, operated under a charter separate and distinct from the charter
under which our protective association conducts its business.
Q. You can answer yes or no; is the Anthracite Monitor recognized by
you, as the president of the executive board, and by your fellow members
of the association, as the organ of the association?
A. It is recognized so far as sending the proceedings are concerned; I
don't wish the committee to understand because the minutes of meetings
are sent there that that paper has any connection whatever with the W. B. A.;
I don't wish any advantage taken of that paper; I make this statement in
order to relieve any person connected with that paper of any responsibility.
Q. The proceedings of the W. B. A., as published in that paper, are
treated and recognized by the association as authentic?
A. That is a question I cannot swear to.
By Mr. Davis Q. Whenever you publish your proceedings do you pub-
lish them in that paper?
'A. Yes, sir; in that and others.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. That is not official more than any other?
A. We often send our proceedings to various papers.
By Mr. Davis.—Q. Your proceedings that are published, are they not
published in that paper?
A. Yes, sir; there is scarcely any proceedings published in any other
papers except what are published in that.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. Are the proceedings sent to the Anthracite
Monitor?
A. Yes, sir; I believe they are; but I never sent the minutes. and for
that reason I would not wish to swear.
[Anthracite Monitor, of February 11, 1871, shown witness.]
Look at those proceedings and state whether you have any personal
knowledge, as president of the association, of the proceedings there spoken
of?
A. Yes, sir; I see my name appearing here; I was there.
Q. Then you have personal knowledge of the proceedings?
A. 1 was there at the meeting; whether those proceedings are correct I
don't know.
Q. Look at the question of resumption of work, marked in blue lines,
and state whether you were present at those proceedings, and if they were
actually had?
[Witness looks at paper.]
A. Yes, sir, I believe so; I believe, to the best of my knowledge, that
those proceedings were actually had at a meeting of the association when
1 was present.
Mr. Lamberton—I now offer in evidence that part of the proceedings as
to the question of resumption of work.
The proceedings were read as follows:
"The question of resumption of work was then brought up. After con-
siderable discussion, several motions and amendments being offered and
<pb>
withdrawn, it was decided, on motion of W. H. Williams, that all the
counties shall resume work on the fifteenth (15) of February, 1871. The
yeas and nays were called for, and were as follows:
"Yeas—Athey, Brennan, Barnes, Delaney, Davis, Corbett, J. N. Evans,
Foley, Harvey, Kene, Bealey, Lloyd, M'Laughlin, Morgan, M'Grath, Miles,
Mullery, O'Halloran, Ryan, Reese, Siney, Sullivan, Watters, W. H. Wil-
liams, John T. Williams, Hewlett—26.
"Navs—Aubrey, Boland, Hughes, Quigley, Wright—5.-
"On motion, resolved, that the proceedings of this council shall not be
made public until the issue of the Monitor of the 11th of February, 1871."
[Anthracite Monitor, dated January 28, 1871, shown witness.]
Q. Look at these minutes of the delegate meeting and see what is there
marked, and say whether it is correct?
A. Yes, sir; I believe this is correct.
Mr. Lamberton read the twelfth resolution from the proceedings of Jan-
uary 27th, as follows:
"12. That we, the workingmen of Schuylkill county, do strictly adhere
to the $3 basis, so long as Luzerne and Carbon work with us in good faith;
if Luzerne and Carbon men do not work with us in good faith that we then
make such agreement as will be best for our own welfare."
Witness.—I don't wish to be misunderstood; I find the minutes of this
meeting purporting to be on the 27th day of January, and the paper was
published on the 28th, and I know that the forms of the paper are generally
locked up on the 27th.
[Anthracite Monitor, dated December 24, 1870, shown witness.]
Q. Is that correct?
A. Yes, sir; I believe so.
Mr. Lamberton read the following extract:
"The-time having arrived when the vote on suspension was called for, Mr.
John Lloyd moved that we suspend on the 10th day of January next.
John Foley then offered an amendment, that the suspension take place on
the 1st day of February. The yeas and nays being called for, the follow-
ing was the result:
"For the Amendment Siney, Reynolds, M'Laughlin, Wheighman,
Ryan, Foley, Wright, John N. Evans and James Keely.
"Against the Amendment.—Miles, Quigley, Lloyd, O'Hallaran, Finerty,
Harvey, Davis, Reese, Williams, Evans, Burk, M'Donough, Barnes, Mul-
ery, Hewlet, John T. Williams, Brennan.
*' The amendment having been lost, the original motion was then put and
carried by the same vote. It was, therefore, decided that a general sus-
pension should take place on the 10th day of January next.
"The question of what kind of work at the mines would be considered
judicious to be done during the suspension.
"On the motion of John Foley, it was agreed that all timbering and re-
pairing, all slopes now in the act of sinking, second openings and rock
tunnels, may be driven, provided, that any coal cut in doing so, shall not
be run through the breaker or shipped to market."
Q. John Wright, whose name is mentioned here as voting and taking
part in these proceedings, is he here?
A. Yes, sir
Q. What position does he hold in the W. B. A.?
A. I do not know that he holds any position.
Q. Where does he live?
<pb>
A. Some part of Luzerne county; I met him in the council.
[Anthracite Monitor, dated March 4, 1871, containing proceedings of
session of March 2d, shown witness, an extract read as follows:]
Moved by John Wright• and seconded by Luke Brennan, that this asso-
ciation will not recognize the question of tolls in connection with the mak-
ing np of the percentage to be paid on labor. Not agreed to.
•• Moved by Peter Quigley, and seconded by John Lloyd, that this asso-
ciation still adheres to the basis of '69, and will not recognize the inter-
ference, in any form, of the railroads and carrying companies.
"The motion was amended by William Watters, amendment seconded
by A. Reese, that Schuylkill region be permitted to slide down to $2 50
per ton, but no lower. After considerable discussion, the vote being called
for, the amendment jsvas lost, and the original motion was agreed to."
Q. Was there any difficulty- between you and the operators in the Schuyl-
kill region as to the basis or prices of wages at the time of the suspen-
sion?
A. We never have had any agreement with our operators.
Q. Was there any difficulty between you and the operators as to the
wages that should be paid?
A. I do not want to evade the question; from the termination of the
GoTren compromise to the present there has never been any arrangement
made, only for the few days that we worked in January; when we went into
the Gowen compromise, the men worked on to the end of 1870 on that
agreement; from the expiration of 1870 to the present time there has been
no arrangement entered into between the employers and employees, except
for a few days in January.
Q. State what was the reason of the suspension of work in the Schuylkill
region on the 10th of January, 1871?
A. Because the men knew that if they did not suspend they would only
be paid on the basis of $2 50; if they suspended and Carbon and Luzerne
suspended, they would be paid on a basis of $3 00.
Q. When was the order issued by your General Council as to the suspen-
sion in the Schuylkill region?
A. It appears on the paper; I have already acknowledged that.
Q. That was the order under which you suspended?
A. Yes, sir; but you must understand that the representatives of Schuyl-
kill voted against that suspension.
Q. And yet you were dictated to when there was no difficulty about
wages by a General Council—you surrendered your right to work to a
General Council?
A. That is the way we differ.
Q. Is it not a fact that there was no difficulty between the men and the
operators of Schuylkill county at the time the General Council issued that
edict requiring you stop work?
A. There was no difficulty likely to occur until the end of the year.
Q. Could you not have gone on at the wages you had been receiving so
as to keep yourselves and families if this order had not been issued?
A. No, sir, I don't think we could.
Q. Are you a practical miner yourself?
A. When I work I work at mining.
Q. When you don't work what do you do?
A. Go loafing around.
Q. Are you paid by the W. B. A.?
A. Yes, sir.
How much do you receive?
<pb>
.
A. $1,500 a year, and pay out of that all my expenses incurred within
the county.
Q. Then it does not make any difference with you whether the miners
are at work or not—you draw your salary?
A. Sometimes I do. and sometimes I don't.
Q. When do you, and when don't j^ou?
A. I have drawn nothing since the suspension.
Q. Is the association indebted to you for your salary from that time?
A. I presume so.
Q. When did you work as a practical miner last 1
A. Two years ago some time in April.
Q. How long has your salary been running, at $1,500 a year, as presi-
dent of Schuylkill?
A. Nearly that length of time.
Q. Did you stop work as a practical miner for the purpose of attending
to the duties of president of that district?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What are your duties for which you draw $1,500 a year?
A. To attend to the general interests of the association.
Q. Tell us what they are?
A. The real interests of the association is a matter of a difference of
opinion.
Q. I am not asking what the difference of opinion is, but what you are
paid for doing?
A. To try to prevent the men being taken advantage of by any body if
I can.
Q. That is your duty 7
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What have you done in pursuance of this arrangement?
A. I have tried, as far as in my power, to prevent isolated strikes and
get the members to understand their true interests to the best of my belief.
Q. When you speak of isolated strikes do you mean in order that you
may promote general ones 1
A. No, sir; when a strike has taken place it was often that the men had
not courage to tell the employers what they wanted, and went home for
weeks, and often had to go to work at reductions.
Q. How many isolated strikes did you prevent in 1870, for which you
were paid your salary?
A. I have not kept an account of them.
Q. Tell us something else that you have done for your $1,500?
A. I have attended to their business—such business as I have been in-
structed to attend to.
Q. What is that business?
A. Well, I have, as often as time would permit, gone around amongst
the men and exchanged views with them, and attended to general business
of that description.
Q. That is the best definition of your duties that you can give us?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And for that they pay you $1,500 a year.
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Are there many persons that occupy that position in the W. B. A.,
drawing the same salaries—is there one for every county?
A. Not that I am aware of.
Q. Is there anybody else in Schuylkill paid a salary?
. A. I believe the secretaries are paid $100 a year.
<pb>
Q. Do the presidents of the branches get nothing?
A. I do not know anything about that.
Q. How often do you meet the executive board?
A. Sometimes we meet monthly; sometimes oftener; sometimes not so
often.
Q. Of whom is that executive board composed?
A. One man from each district—the choice of the people.
Q. How many districts are there in Schuylkill county?
A. I believe there are nineteen.
Q. Do you know whether any of that executive board are paid?
A. For what work they loose they are paid.
Q. Whilst they are absent in attendance upon these boards they are paid
out of the funds of the association?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How much do they receive?
A. I cannot tell you; I believe four dollars per day.
Q. That four dollars is considered equivalent to what he would make if
at work?
A. No, sir; it is not considered an equivalent, and it is taken for
granted that a man cannot go away from his work and attend to business
without spending money.
Q. Is he paid mileage?
A. He is paid railway expenses.
Q. In Schuylkill county, to your personal knowledge, was not the sus-
pension ordered, in order to advance the price of coal, and to sustain the
strike in the Luzerne district?
A. I say nothing of the sort, from my personal knowledge; the suspen-
sion was ordered with the expectation that the men would get an advance
on their labor.
Q. Didn:t 3-ou state before this committee that the strike was for the pur-
pose of keeping up the price of coal?
A. I don't know what I said before this committee; I was not on oath
that night and I was taken by surprise; I could not recollect now what I
said; I don't say that I did not say so.
Q. Was it not for the purpose of sustaining the miners in the Luzerne
region who were then on a strike?
A. Not to sustain them alone.
Q. Was that not one of the reasons?
A. The real cause of our men quitting work was simply because there
had been no arrangement made.
Q. Was it not for the purpose of sustaining the men in the Luzerne re-
gion?
A. It was to sustain ourselves as well as them.
Q. You had not then struck?
A- Ho, sir.
Q. Was not one of the reasons first, to put up or keep up the price of
coal, and secondly to sustain the men in Luzerne region?
A. It was to sustain labor.
Q. Answer the question?
A. I do not know as it was my particular business to have coal go up as
long as we got the advance.
Q. Can't you answer a plain question?
A. I have answered the question; I say the object that our men had in
view when they quit work was the expectation of getting an advance on
their labor.
<pb>
Q. Was not the reason that induced you to suspend the fact that there
was a suspension in the Luzerne region, and also to put up the price of
coal.
A. From the mode in which we had been working heretofore we were sat-
isfied that coal would have to advance before the men would have got much
of an advance; we knew when coal went up we would get an advance.
Q. Didn't you strike for the purpose of putting up the price of coal and
to sustain the men in the Luzerne region?
A. That is a question I would not wish to answer directly; I have ex-
plained it.
Q. Do you say no?
A. I might say yes, and then explain; we knew that if coal did not ad-
vance we could not have got much of an advance above the present prices,
and we contended and contend yet that they are below living prices.
Q. Would you have struck if the men in the Luzerne region had been
at work?
A. No, sir; not on our own account.
Q. Were you not over-ruled in your General Council by the vote of the
Luzerne men, and don't your proceedings show it?
A. The vote of the Luzerne men carried that council, but the votes of
that council did not pledge the action of the men of our county.
Q. Were you not out voted?
A. Yes, sir; I voted in the negative.
Q. Were you instructed to vote against the suspension?
A. I had no instructions at all.
Q. What is the highest branch of your organization?
A. The General Council.
Q. That rules over what extent of territory or what number of men?
A. I could not give the numbers correctly; each county sends a repre-
sentative to the General Council for every 1,000 members; there were 31
members of the council when all the representatives were there.
Q. The strike was ordered by the men composing the General Council,
against the wishes of the Schuylkill men?
A. Yes, sir; against the wishes of the Schuylkill men at that meeting.
Q. Do you know of any suspension that was ordered by the General
Council that was not for the purpose of putting up the price of coal?
A. Yes, sir; I believe I do.
Q. How many suspensions were ordered for some other purpose?
A. There were none of them for that special purpose; all of them had
the avowed object of depleting the market of what was then in it.
By Mr. Hall Q. Are you the chief officer of this organization in
Schuylkill county?
A. Presiding officer.
Q. It is a regular incorporated organization?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And you performed the duties that pertained to your office under
your charter and by-laws?
A. To the best of my ability.
Q. What those duties are are matters entirely between your employers
and yourself?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Have there been complaints by your employers that you don't do the
business satisfactorily?
A. Not generally.
Q. You have been attending to the general interests of the association?
<pb>
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And you have been trying to prevent any advantage being taken of
the men by railroad companies or monopolists of any kind?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You have prevented isolated strikes 1
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What fixes the basis for the miner in Schuylkill is the price that coal
brings at Port Carbon?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. That is 93 miles from Philadelphia?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. If coal should get so low at Port Carbon that the wages of the work-
men would go down to $T a week, and the miner had a family, would that
be a living price?
A. I should think not.
Q. Has that often been the case with outside laborers?
A. No, sir; not since the war.
Q. At any time?
A. Yes, sir; before the war.
Q. What would the wages of an outside laborer be at the basis of $2 25
at Port Carbon 1
A. About $8 28.
Q. Would that be living wages for a man with a family of five children?
A. No, sir; not in my judgment.
Q. If you and the miners of that region ever did induce a strike was it
in order to make your wages better?
A. That was the general object.
Q. Did it make one particle difference to you what coal brought at Port
Carbon or Philadelphia if you got living wages?
A. No, sir.
Q. Then you were forced to get living prices in order to get living
wages?
A. That is the idea.
Q. This basis fixed for you at Port Carbon or Elizabethport were wages
fixed by the operators?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Then they were submitted to you, and you either accepted of de-
clined?
A. We always accepted.
Q. Except when you struck?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. The only evidence you had that you did not accept was the strike?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. I call you attention to the paper introduced by the president of the
Reading railroad; this paper is headed "proposition for adjusting wages
for 1871;" Mr. Cole swore that you told him at Mr. Kendrick's office, in
Pottsville, that the miners in the Schuylkill region had accepted this propo-
sition—is that true?
A. To my knowledge I never told that to mortal being.
Q. Did they accept 1
A. Not to my knowledge.
Q. Did you ever tell Mr. Cole so % ...
A. Not to my knowledge.
Q. Is not the whole object of your organization laid down in its charter,
enacted in your by-laws, and is not the work of your every day live to
<pb>
protect the wages of labor and to give your men living wages, according
to the best of your judgment?
A. I believe that is the object of the men.
Q. Is that not the sole and only purpose of your organization?
A. I have never read the charter closely.
Q. Well then the by-laws?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Was there ever anything done by the different organizations of which
you are the head, in Schuylkill county, on which they took action, except
the proposition talked of by Mr. Gowen, and which is in this paper?
A. Not to my knowledge.
Q. What was the condition of affairs in the mining region prior to the
time you started this organization—was it not absolutely necessary that
the workmen should band together to protect themselves?
A. We banded together to prevent these isolated strikes and protect our-
selves.
Q. Were their bad men in the districts, who interfered with the mining
of coal and the prosperity of the country?
A. There were a good many bad things done?
Q. Has your association tried to prevent these bad things?
A. Yes, sir; always.
Q. Since you started your organization have the men had greater liber-
ties as to purchasing articles of food, &c.?
A. Co-operative stores were not started before; those have been of ser-
vice to the laborers.
Q. State how this price of coal is regulated—who do you make the bar-
gain with?
A. The Anthracite Board of Trade.
Q. Has the Reading company or any road any thing to do with you?
A. The Reading road has never been called in directly.
Q. Are they a party to the contract in any way?
A. No.
Q. Did they ever sign a contract with you of any kind?
A. No, sir. . *
Q. Was there a time a year ago that Mr. Gowen undertook to do this
same thing 1
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How much did he put up the tolls then?
A. I forget—pretty high.
Q. Was it not $1 25 a ton?
A. I don't know.
Q. When was it that he did this?
A. The latter end of March or beginning of April, 1870.
Q. This Monitor is taken and circulated generally throughout the mining
regions?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. In that respect it is called a miner's paper?
A. Yes, sir.
Henry L. Cake, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Direct examination by Mr. Hall Q. Please state where you reside and
what your business is!
A. I live in Philadelphia; I am president of the Philadelphia and Alaska
<pb>
coal companies; I have an interest in four collieries—three in the Shenan-
doah valley and one in Tamaqua.
[Mr. Hall stated that Mr. Cake had prepared a written statement, which
he proposed to have him read.]
Witness—When first subpoenaed I came here and had an interview with
the chairman of the committee, and asked him what the range of this in-
vestigation was to be, and told him I would rather prepare a statement, of
which I would keep a copy, because, standing as I do, it might seem singu-
lar that I occupy this position. I have consulted my partner in business,
and we understand the position this places me in, and the threats that have
been made that I am to be driven out of the coal business. In making my
statement of course I know the risk I run. I have here the pay-roll of our
No. 1 colliery, from May until December, la3t year, which I propose to leave
in the hands of the committee. Here is a statement, made by one of our
clerks, showing the highest amount of money made by any set of men.
Q. Is that correct?
A. It is correct according to our books, and we paid according to our
books; this shows the amount of coal we shipped and the number of men
employed at this colliery, and every dollar paid to those men.
[Offered in evidence; marked "pay-roll Colorado colliery."]
[Witness commenced to read statement.]
Mr. Lamberton objected to any written statement which he had not seen
and to witness giving his thoughts and ideas; the witness must give facts
and speak from memory.
Mr. Hall These are facts, written down, and the witness will swear that
they are facts.
The committee decided that witness should make an oral statement and
not read from manuscripts.
By Mr. Hall Q. What is that book you have before you?
A. This is the pay-roll book for the No. 1 colliery, running from May to
December.
Q. Does that show all that you have paid during a given time?
A. Yes, sir; it gives the names of all except the workmen who worked
for the various contractors, who hired and paid their own men; of course,
their names did not get upon our book; it gives the names of nearly five
hundred men.
Q. How long have you been in th« coal trade?
A. I have had to do with the coal business certainly twelve years; in-
directly I have been in the business longer than that.
Q. Have strikes been frequent during that time?
A. Very.
Q. Is your coal company in any conflict with the workingmen?
A. It is not.
Q. Is the present stoppage more complete than ever before, and was not
the cause of it accident?
A. I believe the stoppage is more complete than any other we have ever
been subjected to; it was, in a measure, the cause of accident; coal ruled
very low towards the latter part of last year, and was so low at the sale
of the Scranton companies, in November, that it was thought by those
companies best to put their wages down to a very low figure, even if it
brought on a stoppage of the men. The prices were ruling so low for
Schuylkill coal that. if it had not been for the stoppage of the Scranton
region, the Schuylkill region would have gone out in a very few days, but
by that stoppage Schuylkill county was enabled to go on, and many col-
lieries that were thrown idle because of the want of a market in the latter
<pb>
part of last year were enabled to resume work, and worked until the 10th
of January; on the 10th of January nearly all the laborers—all that be-
longed to the W. B. A—stopped work, in accordance with the agreement
with the Scranton men; I believe that to be the fact; the whole region
was practically idle from the 10th of January until the 15th of February,
when the men proposed to resume work; at that time they were met by a
combination of coal operators and carrying companies to prevent their
going to work until they agreed to certain propositions submitted to them.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. You are speaking from your own personal
knowledge?
A. It is from my experience.
Q. We want what you know 1
A. According to my knowledge and belief; it was told to me by coal
operators and by presidents of various railroads; I don't belong to the
Scallawag Coal Operators' Beneficial Association, or anything of that kind.
They made a proposition to the miners that I have understood they did not
accept.
The Chairman What the [witness heard from other people is not evi-
dence.
By Mr. Hall—Q. Were you told this by any men who were members of
the Anthracite Board of Trade, or by any of the carrying companies that
carry coal from the mines to the market?
A. I cannot recollect any particular individual who gave me this infor-
mation.
Q. Were you told it by any of the earriers of coal to market, or by any
members of the Anthracite Board of Trade?
A. I was told about all that occurred by Mr. Benjamin Thomas, who is
a coal operator, but I don't know whether he belongs to the Anthracite
Board of Trade or not; he has an interest in a mine in the anthracite re-
gion; I was told by a great many other gentlemen.
Q. You were also told it by others of the operators and carrying com-
panies?
A. I was; I recollect one conversation I had with Mr. Borda.
Q. What did Mr. Borda tell you?
A. Just before the arrangement was made I met Mr. Borda in New York,
and he said that that would be the course—that the carrying companies
and operators would combine and have a stand-out against the men; and
that, for the benefit of such operators as worked, the companies would put
up such fancy rates of toll that it would tax them out, or words to that
effect.
Q. Where was this?
A. In New York.
Q. When, as near as you can recollect?
A. I would not like to say when.
Q. What month?
A. The latter part of January or early in February.
Q. What caused the last strike in the Schuylkill region?
A. It is very difficult to frame answers in that way; I only know from
the effeet and public rumor, and from conversations with railroad men and
workingmen at the time; it was an agreement among the men that all the
regions should stop on the 10th of January.
Q. What caused that?
A. The primary cause was the low price of coal the latter part of last
year; as a result, the decline in wages offered by the great companies in
Scranton, and the combination of the workingmen to resist that.
<pb>
Q. To resist the low wages?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Had there been a strike before that, which was caused by the Anthra-
cite Board of Trade?
A. On the first of April last the coal operators combined to get up a
new deal with the men in Schuylkill county, and in order to compel the
men to submit, they stopped work on the first of April; some of that diffi-
culty was caused by a decline in the wages of the Reading railroad employ-
ees, which put them on a strike for a few days; the operators combined to
get up a new basis with the men?
Q. To put wages down?
A. Yes, sir; that was the intention of the new basis; it was intended to
modify the basis of 1869, which only involved a lowering of wages to cor-
respond with the price of coal at $3 at Port Carbon.
Q. Did they succeed in causing a strike?
A. The major part of Schuylkill county remained idle until about the
first of August.
Q. Did they resume then?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. On what basis?
A. On a modification proposed by Mr. Gowen.
Q. Called the Gowen compromise?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. So the operators won that fight?
A. They won that fight.
Q. How long did the men work?
A. Throughout the year on that basis.
Q. Was there another strike 1
A. The strike that occurred on the 10th of January.
Q. What was the purpose?
A. I have stated that Schuylkill county went out, in accordance with an
arrangement they made with the Scranton men; I only know this from
hearsay.
Q. You have no difficulty at all with your men now? > .
A. We have no difficulty now; we have had difficulties the same as other
people.
Q. What are the present rates of toll on the Reading railroad from your
mines to Richmond?
A. Our two collieries in the Shenandoah valley are about 106 miles from
Richmond, by the way of Port Carbon and Reading, which is our usual
shipping route; from those it costs us $6 95 and $7 00 a ton; because of
the general stoppage, the plane is not running and the coal has been going
by way of Tamaqua, which is further; the first bill that was made out to
us was made out to equalize the usual charge from the collieries to Rich-
mond. From Millersburg to Port Richmond the prices are $2 47 for about
148 miles; that coal goes through Harrisburg and takes the Reading road
here; this was told to me by Mr. Sinickson; I cannot say with certainty
that it is 148 miles, but it is near that.
Q. Do they discriminate on the Reading railroad?
A. If that is discrimination, they discriminate against our coal. *
Q. Are those rate3 from your collieries to Philadelphia reasonable?
A. The most we ever paid before that I can recollect, was $3 58 from
Port Carbon to Richmond.
Q. What year was that in?
A. I think in 1864 and 1865.
<pb>
Q. Was that the case in spring of 1865?
A. It was the case for a long time; I think that was the highest; that
is only from recollection.
Q. Are these present rates reasonable?
A. No, sir.
Q. Are they exorbitant?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Are they in effect prohibitory?
A. They are to an extent; at $4 00 a ton instead of $7 00 for freight, I
don't think there would be two collieries in Schuylkill county idle to-day.
Q. Would $4 00 a ton from Port Carbon to Philadelphia be reasonable?
A. No, sir.
Q. What has been the effect of the workingraen's organization on coal
operations in Schuylkill oounty—has it been good or not over the conduct
and morals of the men?
A. In my experience it has been good, and beneficial to the operators;
before that we had nothing to appeal to except the men, when they went on
a strike; since the organization of this association, when we had difficulty
with the men, we always submitted the question to the association, and, I
think, in every case but one it was decided in our favor, and the men re-
sumed upon our terms.
Q. What was the first blow that the workingmen's organization received—
where did it come from?
A. From the Scranton company; that company declined to treat with
their men, in order to break the force of their organization; I was in
Scranton at the time, and got a good deal of information from Mr. Al-
bright; they put the wages so high that the men could hardly refuse such
compensation, and they went to work at a rate higher than ever before
paid; that, of course, took the Scranton people out of the association; of
this I only know from what I hear.
Q. Did not the coal market droop in the latter part of 1869, and what
caused it to droop, if it did?
A. The very great amount of coal shoved into market caused a decline,
of course, in prices.
Q. What was done, if anything, by the coal operators' association about
that time?
A. In the latter part of 1869, or the early part of 1870, the coal ope-
rators made a basis that was very low; I believe the men at that time
were satisfied; one of our collieries had stopped on some frivolous pre-
tence during September, but I think the men generally were satisfied and
desired no change, but the operators undertook to get up a very low
basis; that caused the men to go upon a new hunt for more wages, and
they got up a strike, fixed for the 1st of March; but because they could
not include the Scranton men, who were getting fine wages, the strike was
not made general, and they resumed work upon the old terms in about ten
days.
Q. What was coal bringing then at Port Carbon?
A. From $3 50 down to $2 50; there was no pretence that they were
not getting enough.
Q. In view of this what did the O. B. A. do?
A. They organized a strike; they stopped their collieries.
Q. What do you call the O. B. A.?
A. The Anthracite Board of Trade—dignified with the name of the An
thracite Board of Trade.
Q. What did that end in?
<pb>
A. The submission of the men.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. Did they put down the wages?
A. They offered the men a lower rate of wages, which the men refused
to work for, and then they stopped and declined to work until the men did
agree.
By Mr. Hall Q. Was there a suspension?
A. Some few collieries worked.
Q. Where did the men from the Schuylkill region go?
A. A great many went to other regions; a great many went to the soft
coal regions; that strike commenced on the 1st of April, 1870, or about
that time.
Q. How did this state of affairs suit the Reading railroad company?
A. Of course they did not like it, and Mr. Gowen stepped in and, by his
personal influence with the men, he induced them to agree to his modifica-
tion—called the Gowen compromise; if I recollect right, it was the basis
of 1869, with a dodification of 33 per cent. advance and decline, down to
$2; it was adjusted on an advance and decline of twenty-five cents a ton,
so that when coal brought $2 88 at Port Carbon we paid, on a straight
basis, as though it brought $3; but when it brought $2 87 the men were
compelled to take their wages as though it had brought only $2 75; that
caused trouble.
Q. Did coal go down?
A. Yes, sir; to less than $2 25 at Port Carbon; I think the men were
paid as though coal brought $2 25 for November.
Q. Did the men demand a change?
A. The men said they were cheated, and wanted a change; Mr. Gowen
then came again, I was told, with a modification; then there was an ar-
rangement made to submit another proposition; here is a copy taken at the
time in our office.
Q. What did the managers of the 0. B. A. do at this time?
A. I really don't know; when the men appealed for a decision of course
they were resisted by that board until this modification proposed again by
Mr. Gowen; he was the general moderator; it was supposed something of
that kind would be agreed to. i
Q. Do you know whether the men of Schuylkill accepted that?
A. I was told by the operators and workmen both that the men did not
agree; I don't know the fact; in the midst of the negotiation the Scranton
strike came on, and that dissipated all hope of getting an arrangement;
the men agreed to resume on the 15th of February; they did resume at our
places.
Q. Why didn't they elsewhere?
A. The Anthracite Board of Trade would not go to work.
Q. Had the tolls been put up?
A. Not at that time; a number of collieries tried to work; probably
they would have resumed at $4 08; a great many encouraged us to go to
work because they wanted an excuse for starting.
Q. Shortly after that it was raised to $6 08?
A. Yes, sir; something like that; in changing the course of our coal to
the longer route, it was in the neighborhood of $6 25 from Tamaqua to
Richmond.
Q. These rates have the effect of preventing people from working who de-
sire to work?
A. We work just enough to keep certain furnaces hot; we cannot pay the
tolls upon the smaller kinds of coal, and run the risk of keeping it on
<pb>
hand; our customers buy enough to last twenty-four hours, because there
is an impression that there will be a resumption. *
Q. On account of the reduction of tolls?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. This keeps you and all coal men in this uncertain condition?
A. Yes, sir—uncertainty and distress; Mr. Thomas told me that the
impression was created that there would be an early resumption; the im-
pression was created to prevent our working and selling our small sizes;
he said that impression would be created by him and others.
Q. Did he tell you that had been done?
A. Yes, sir—or would be done.
Q. When did he tell you that?
A. A little before the'15th of March.
Q. Which has lost the most time, Schuylkill or Luzerne?
A. I should judge Schuylkill.
Q. Has the management of the operators' association had any thing to
do with that?
A. Yes, sir, I think so.
Q. Adverse to operations in Schuylkill county?
A. Yes, sir; I think they have been very adverse to operations.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. Who do you mean?
A. I mean the Anthracite Board of Trade; they seem to delight in get-
ting into a fight with the men; that seems to be what they were organized
for—to starve them to death; I believe that was the plan.
Q. You are swearing to this?
A. Yes, sir; my testimony is that the operations of the Anthracite Board
of Trade have been against the business of the coal trade in Schuylkill
county—that is, that they have militated against the business; a more con-
ciliatory policy than they have pursued would have steered us clear of- a
great deal of the trouble that has been thrust upon us.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. At the time these operators caused this strike what
was the price of coal?
A. I think the lowest at which we had made sales was $2 50. and we had
made sales as high as $3 25; I have heard of no complaint at the time of
that strike in April, 1870, of the price of coal.
Q. In your opinion, what will be the effect of this railroad war upon the
workingmen, should it result in a victory for the carrying companies?
A. If the men were compelled to submit, I doubt whether they would go
/ over more than the third pay-day before we would have this farce played
over again; there is no safe settlement short of some sort of compromise;
my opinion is that thing can only be settled by compromise or arbitration.
Q. You are not speaking of the way of settling if the railroad companies
have been violating their charters?
A. I have great belief in Mr. Gowen's ability; I don't believe that he
feels that his charter is in danger.
Q. You have said that the rates are unreasonable, exorbitant and pro-
hibitory—you don't speak of that in reference to your compromise?
A. No, sir; I do not complain of anything that the Reading road does,
except they are discriminating for and against certain coals.
Q. Do you think any corporation has a right to discriminate in that way?
A. We are accustomed to believe that the Heading railroad can do any-
thing. ■ i
Q. And it is on that basis that you speak of Mr. (iowen 1
A. I believe he knows what he is about; I don't believe he would have
been coaxed into this thing by parties.
<pb>
Q. Why is it that you believe he has done this?
^Objected to by Mr. Lamberton. Mr. Hall offered to prove that Mr.
Gowen has been acting in concert with the Anthracite Board of Trade,
and that it is their malign influence over him that has caused him to vio-
late his charter.]
Q. Was Mr. Gowen's policy on this road the same that it now is, prior
to the first of January this year? >
Mr. Petrikin Ask what Mr. Gowen did.
By Mr. Hall—Q. What was the policy of the road, as shown by what Mr.
Gowen and the board of directors did prior to the 1st of January this
year, as compared with the present policy of the road, which you say is
extortionate f *-
A. I think they discriminate against Schuylkill county.
By Mr. Lamberton—Q. What did they do?
A. They are charging at least two Schuylkill county operators $6 95 for
about 106 miles, and they are charging two other collieries in the upper
end of Dauphin county $2 47 for about 140 miles, or over; that is one
thing I complain of; last summer they put the tolls up $1 or $1 50 a ton
because of the strike at that time; I don't believe they were influenced by
the Anthracite Board of Trade; that was in the direction of this present
policy, but not so marked as this; it lasted but a short time.
By Mr. Hall—Q. Was not this last action on account of the influence of
these men?
A. Mr. Borda told me that a fancy rate of tolls would be fixed to meet
the case of those who would insist upon working, and not stand out, and
it was done; I think he made use of those words; I think Mr. Borda was
the representative man of the board in the conference at New York, and
it was upon one of those trips to New York; they either had held a ses-
sion to put up this scheme, or were to have one.
Q. You did not go into this scheme, and were not against your men
working?
A. We never had anything to do with any cabal of that kind; at least I
had not.
Q. This Colorado colliery is one of yours?
A. Yes, sir; my partner signed a paper once, with the proviso that he
would work his colliery if any other colliery worked.
Q. What has the Colorado colliery been producing a year?
A. Something over 100,000 tons.
Q. These books that you have here and this paper given in evidence show
the amount of wages paid?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What would you call a skillful miner?
A. To be skillful a man ought to be a pretty good rough carpenter and
do his own wood work.
Q. What would you do if your men wanted more wages than you would
feel inclined to pay?
A. Before the organization of the W. B. A. we would have to do the best
we could; since that if they demanded anything that was not authorized
by the association we appealed to the association.
Q. When did you have your last strike?
A. Colorado stood idle in September last nearly the whole month, on ac-
count of some frivolous thing.
Q. How many men did you employ at all your collieries last year?
A. I think some 1,200; I don't think we employed over 1,000 at any one
time; I think if we were running now we would employ over 1,200 men.
<pb>
Q. Are you a practical printer?
A. Yes, sir. *
Q. What could you earn, as a practical printer, under the Printers'
Union, as compared with the wages of your miners under the W. B. A.?
A. I could, if I should go to my trade, make more money than any man
working for me last year made at mining coal, under the rates exacted now
by the Printers' Union.
Cross-examined by Mr. Lamberton—Q. You stated that you had a strike
in September for some frivolous cause; can you recollect what it was?
A. I don't recollect; the latter part of the strike had some relation to
the size of the boys; I think the greater part of the strike was on account
of the boys wanting a raise of wages, and it was settled by a committee of
the miners.
Q. Did the men all stop because you did not pay the boys the wages de-
manded?
A. We could not work without the boys.
Q. The men all stopped?
A. How could they help it?
Q. Did they sympathize with the boys?
A. I cannot say.
Q. Did you complain to the association'!
A. I think some of the fathers of the boys got it settled by taking them
to other collieries to see if others were paid more.
Q. I want to get at the fact which you have referred to, that whenever
there was a difficulty you appealed to the association; was that the case'!
A. I don't recollect about the boys; but I recollect that the association
fixed up everything; if we had any difficulty with the men in regard to the
rate of wages, if it lasted more than a few days, we always appealed to the
association; sometimes trouble would be caused about the wages; some-
times by frivolous things.
Q. Would they be sustained?
A. When the majority of them concluded to stop, they stopped.
Q. It was to this tribunal that you appealed to settle any difficulty that
you might have between yourself and your men?
A. They, I think, in every case but one, decided against the men.
Q. And they did go to work?
A. Generally.
• Q. You have given us certain figures with regard to the cost of trans-
portating coal to Port Richmond from your mines; you have stated that
it cost $6 95 and $7 00 in going directly to Philadelphia; is that right?
A. I stated that in making up that sum they charge for every mile that
it goes around by Tamaqua.
Q. Then the charge is as I have stated'!
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Then, when the coal is shipped by the way of Millersburg, over the
Northern Central, and brought on to the Lebanon Valley, how much is it?
A. $2 47, Mr. Sinickson told me.
Q. Then the discrimination you complain of is that when the Reading
railroad carries by the way of Tamaqua it is $6 95, and when coal is taken
over the Northern Central, it is $2 47?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Is that discrimination?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you know whether there is any arrangement between the North-
12
<pb>
em Central railroad and the Philadelphia and Reading, as to the rates of
freight upon all coal shipped over the Northern Central?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you know that this coal is taken up at Millersburg'
!
A. Yes, sir.
Q. The Northern Central runs from Millersburg to Dauphin?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. The rate is fixed by the Northern Central, is it not?
A. To that point.
Q. Then you don't know whether the rate is fixed by the Northern Cen-
tral for the carrying of coal from Millersburg to Philadelphia, and that the
Reading road only gets its proportion of the rate charged?
A. It was stated to me that there was some arrangement about that part
of the road belonging to the Pennsylvania road, and that some mutual
agreement allowed the Reading company to use this five miles, so that the
Reading company would make their charges probably from Dauphin to
Philadelphia; the difficulty in our business is that from Reading down the
coal passes over the same segment of road.
Q. That is the only complaint you have against the road?
A. I don't make it as a complaint; it blocks us out.
Q. You stated that the only thing you iad to complain of was the dis-
crimination? »
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And this is the discrimination to which you referred?
A. Yes, sir; I also heard that a coal operator had special rates by which
he could work.
Q. Who?
A. Preck.
Q. From whom did you hear about any discrimination in favor of Freck?
A. If I were compelled to tell you his name I would do it, but if not, I
would not like to.
Q. Will you tell me the name of the person who told you?
A. I think it would probably militate against the business of the man
who told me, and I would rather not answer that question, if the commit-
tee will relieve me.
[The committee desired the witness to answer.]
A. Spofford and Clark—either one of the firm—told me that Freck was
selling coal at a price that would very little more than cover what we were .
paying at Richmond; that he had some kind of a dispensation to enable
him to do it.
Q. Did he state the fact that there was a discrimination in his favor 1
A. That was the inference.
Q. Tell me the precise words that Spofford or Clark told you?
A. I cannot.
Q. Did they use the word discrimination?
A. I don't think they did.
Q. It was an inference of yours that there was a discrimination?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. I would like you to produce the bill furnished you by Mr. Sinickson?
A. That I will not do unless compelled; you can read it, if you will not
read the name; Mr. Sinickson gave me all the information I have got.
Q. Did he state in the receipt what you have testified to?
A. I told him I knew the fact and asked him when they commenced to
pay the tolls; I had understood from the parties who showed me the paper
that the tolls were either to Harrisburg or Dauphin, and he corrected that,
*
<pb>
and said that the $2 47 included all the tolls to Richmond; Mr. Sinickson
handles the Lykens Valley coal.
Q. To whom was that receipt given?
A. That would be telling what I think should not be insisted upon.
Q. You decline to give the name of that gentleman to whom that receipt
was given? .
A. Unless the committee say I must give it I would rather not.
Q. What is your reason for not giving us that name?
A. It might involve the gentleman in some trouble; I think he was rather
sorry he gave it to me. »
Q. Did he give it to you to be brought here; or to furnish information
from which you might speak?
A. No, sir.
Q. Why did he give it to you?
A. He handed it to me and I put it in my pocket; I didn't know but
what I might talk about it; I wanted to show it to Mr. Sinickson; I think
it would be unfair to give his name.
Q. Does your statement show the wages you paid in 1869 and 1870?
A. No, sir; only commencing in May.
Q. Does it show the number of days worked by each man 1
A. The book does, but the statement does not.
Q. What was the highest average made per day by any of those who
worked by contract 1 .
A. William Bracy & Co.—two men—averaged $156 57 per month for the
full year, out of which they paid their laborers.
Q. Do you know how many days they worked?
A. We run the collieries less than 200 days.
Q. We cannot tell by reference to the "statements the number of days
those men worked?
A. No, sir.
Q. How many days did the highest one work?
. A. I don't think you can get that. . ■
Q. How many yards would they average per day?
A. I cannot tell that; William Bracy & Co. are credited with 421 yards
of gangway in the month of July; that was at $8 50; their net pay that
month was $357 00.
Q. Were not those paying wages to the men?
A. Yes, sir; I judge they did pretty well that month; we appear to have
paid these men more than any others?
Q. Did they work more days or take out more yards of coal than any
body else—I want to know what a good, skillful miner would earn per day
at the prices you were paying in 1870?
A. My testimony would be entirely worthless in that regard, simply for
the reason that I am a practical printer and not a practical miner.
Q. You can't tell what a skillful miner, working in your collieries, could
make in a day?
A. I don't know.
Q. Does the average you speak of include the boys about the mines as
well as the men?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You stated that strikes have been frequent in your collieries?
A. Quite as frequent as in others.
Q. Do you say that your company has had no conflict at all with the W
B. A—no differences?
A. Not that I am cognizant of.
<pb>
Q. In 1868 was there a strike at your collieries?
A. I presume there was; I don't think they would let us go through a
year without a strike, but I cannot re-call any.
Q. Did you favor a strike in 1868 or 1869, for the purpose of putting up
the price of coal?
A. I am always in favor of sustaining the price of coal.
Q. Did you favor a strike for the purpose of putting up the price of
coal?
"Objected to "by Mr. Hall, as not being cross-examination.]
Objection over-ruled.]
A. If I had my say I suppose I would never sell coal at a ruinous rate;
I suppose I have urged a plan to get decent prices.
Q. Have you favored strikes for the purpose of putting up the price of
coal?
A. I don't exactly know what you mean by strikes.
Q. Or suspensions?
A. Do you mean by the operators or men 1
Q. Either by the operators or men; have you favored suspensions for
the purpose of putting up the price of coal to the consumer?
A. I have favored a plan by which we could get a fair price for coal.
Q. Have you favored suspensions for the purpose of putting up the price
of coal to the consumer?
A. To what figure?
Q. What have you done—have you favored it 1
A. Well, I suppose I have; I presume I have.
Q. Have you?
A. I don't like to be so categorical as that.
Q. Please say yes or no to my question, and theii make any explanation
you desire.
[Objected to by Mr. Hall. Objection over-ruled.]
A. I cannot answer the question by saying yes or no; if nothing else
but yes or no will do, I cannot answer the question; if you will let me saj--
that when coal was about to decline to a ruinous figure I have very fre-
quently submitted plans by which we could defend ourselves from that sort
of destruction; I think I have on several occasions submitted plans.
Q. Do I understand you to say that you cannot answer that, yes or no?
A. I have answered you by saying—
Q. Do I understand you to say that you cannot answer that question,
yes or no?
A\ I have submitted plans by which—
Q. I have not asked you about plans; do I understand you to say that you
cannot answer the question whether you have favored suspensions for the
purpose of putting up the price of coal to the consumer?
A. When coal has been ruinously low we have been compelled to sus-
pend ourselves.
Q. I did not ask you that?
A. I have answered.
Q. You say you cannot answer, yes or no?
A. I might answer if I disregarded all recollection.
Q. Is it because you don't recollect whether you have favored suspen-
sions—is that the reason you don't answer the question?
A. I have favored stoppages when coal became so low that we could
make nothing out of it; for the mere develish desire of putting coal up, I
doubt whether I have done anything of the kind—not from the mere wil-
<pb>
ful desire to put up the price of coal to the consumer above what would be
a fair price to the operator.
Q. Have you advocated the policy of suspensions for the purpose of
putting up the price of coal?
A. I don't think you put it fairly; I think you want to make me make
an admission to militate against me as a business man.
Mr. Davis.—If you answer the question, yes or no, you can explain after-
wards.
A. My position has always been that there was no profit to the operator
at $2 a ton; my impression is that coal ought to bring from $2 50 to $3,
in order to pay a fair rate of wages to the men, and to sustain: that I would
agree that we should stop when coal got in that neighborhood; whether I
have ever done it, in direct terms, I would rather you would not ask me;
all that I have ever done is published; I have printed it.
Q. Would you rather I would not ask you because you do not remember,
or because you don't want to answer the question?
A. I have done so many things in relation to this coal business that I
would rather not be compelled to answer straight out in that way.
Q. Is it because you do not want to answer the question, or do not want
to do it in public?
A. I have avowed a policy by which coal could remain steady; I have
always been the advocate of some plan by which the idle time shall be me-
thodically distributed.
Q. Was one of those plans suspensions?
A. I think they were all suspensions.
Q. Suppose, by reason of an excess of supply in the market, coal falls
below $2 50 or $3, do you advocate a suspension of work in order to bring
it up?
A. I believe it ought not to fall below $2 50 at Port Carbon, for fur-
nace, and $3 for domestic sizes; I would favor a policy that would bring
about such a state of affairs.
Q. Take the basis at $2 50, with the sliding scale, as recommended by
Mr. Siney and these operators, of one per cent. for three cents rise or fall
above or below that basis, is that not reasonable, fair and just to operators
and men?
A. I don't think it would be reasonable or just, for the reason that if
you fix the price that will be the price to which coal will tend.
Q. Can there be any permanency of price unless profits and losses are
shared together by operators and workmen?
A. While the operator can produce in eight or nine months all the coal
that can be consumed in twelve, it is inevitable that some idle time must
ensue; the question is where that idle time shall rest; I have believed.
from my knowledge, that a division of that time can more safely rest with
the men than any other body.
Q. Will you please to state whether there can be any thing more fair or
just than a scale or basis which enables the workmen to share the profits
with the operators, and share the losses with them?
A. We recognize that general principle.
Q. When coal falls below $2 50 the operator loses?
A. I think so.
Q. Ought not wages to go down when the operator cannot work his mine
to advantage?
A. As a coal operator I would say yes; if I were a miner I would say no.
Q. Don't you think that it is fair for all parties to share profits and losses
togethe*?
<pb>
A. Yes, sir. *
Q. Can you carry on your colliery without great pecuniary loss when
coal falls below $2 50 or $2 00?
A. It would be impossible; there is no coal operator in the anthracite
region that could pay the straight basis of 1869 without any fall, and pay
the basis of $3 00. I think there is not five per cent. difference to-day be-
tween what the operators would agree to give and what the miners would
agree to take; I think it is about a difference of 17 cents a week.
Adjourned until to-morrow at half-past two P. M.
EVENING SESSION.
The committee met at 8 o'clock P. M.
Examination of John Siney resumed by Mr. Lamberton.'
Question Will you fix the time at which you became the president of
the executive board of Schuylkill county, at a salary of $1,500 a year?
Answer Sometime in April, 1869.
Q. Had you been working as a miner before that time?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Are you by trade a miner?
A. No; I have no trade.
Q. What was your trade before you came to this country?
A. I was raised in a cotton mill.
Q. Then all you know about mining is what you acquired since you caine
to this country?
A. Yes sir.
Q. When did you first go into the mines'!
A. 1863.
Q. Then you worked as a miner from 1863 to 1869?
A. I began to work in tfee mines of this country the latter part of 1863.
Q. What did you begin to work at in 1863?
A. On repairs—as a laborer.
Q. In the latter part of 1864, went in as a miner?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. To work by the day, or on contract?
A. By contract.
Q. You worked by contract, how long?
A. Until I quitted the mines.
Q. Then your knowledge of working by contract as a miner dates from,
the latter part of 1864, and runs up to April, 1869?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. At the time you ceased working as a miner and took this office, what
wages were you earning?
A. I could not tell.
Q. Take the month immediately preceding the time you became presi-
dent of this board?
A. I cannot tell; I would have to refer to the books.
Q. Cannot you give me any approximation?
A. No, sir.
Q. Cannot you tell whether you made three, five or ten dollars a day?
A. There were days that I made five; some days I did not make two.
Q. What is the average for the year preceding the year you became presi-
dent of the board?
A. I don't know.
Q. Can you form any estimate?
A. No, sir.
<pb>
'183
Q. You don't know what you averaged as a miner?
A. No, sir; not of my own knowledge.
Q. The terms offered by the operators, as I understand, was $2 50 a ton
at Port Carbon, with the sliding scale, up and down, of one cent to the
miner for three cents rise or fall?
A. When?
Q. The terms offered by the operators, which you recommended?
A. »I think I understood it to be $2 25; I am not exactly sure; I know
it was to begin at $2 50.
Q. The basis being at $2 50, and that being the minimum price of coal,
I want to know what a miner could earn by contract on an average even-
day of eight hours' work?
A. That is more than I can tell.
Q. You have heard the testimony of operators here, and you have seen
one operator with his book, giving the average, now, with your experience
as a miner and as president of the executive board, ought to be able to
judge what the ordinary rate of wages would be in the mines—just answer
if you can?
A. I have already said that I cannot answer; I cannot approximate the
earnings1 under oath.
Q. Taking any colliery with which you have acquaintance, cannot you
tell me what a miner could earn working by contract?
A. I could not.
Q. Could you tell me if you were to go into the colliery of Mr. Heu-
drick's, what you could earn a day at the basis of $2 50?
A. I never dug coal in Mr. Hendrick's colliery.
Q. Take any colliery where you have been engaged?
A. It would depend upon the place; some places I might earn $5, and
some not $2.
Q. Take any colliery you have an acquaintance with; do you mean to
tell me you don't know what you could earn as a miner in any colliery in
which you have been engaged?
A. I have already told you that I cannot tell you.
Q. Then, why is it that you recommended the miners of Schuylkill county
to go to work at this basis?
A. To avoid this conflict.
Q. At what had they been working before?
A. The last time the two committees met to ascertain the price of coal,
the average at Port Carbon was $2 75^.
Q. On your oath I ask you if you have the slightest doubt in your mind,
that if the miners had accepted this proposition of yours, to go to work on
the $2 50 basis, with the sliding scale, could they not have made money and
supported their families. Have you the slightest doubt of it in your own
mind?
A. Yes, sir; I have.
Q. Then you believe it is better for these miners to be idle month after
month, with their families dependent upon them, than to go work at these
prices of $2 50?
A. No, sir; I believe nothing of the kind.
Q. Are you a married man?
A. No, sir.
Q. No family?
A. I have some dependent on me—my mother and a daughter.
Q.- You think this better for these men to be standing idle than to go to
work at this basis of $2 501
<pb>
A. I did not say so.
Q. I understood you to say to Mr. Hall that they were starvation prices?
A. I say so still, but half a loaf is better than no bread.
Q. Then it was to avoid any conflict between the miner and operators
that you recommended this proposition?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Was there any difficulty upon the subject between the miners and
operators at the time of this operation?
A. Not to amount to any thing?
Q. Was not this price agreed upon by you and Mr. Ryan, as the repre-
sentatives of the W. B. A., in conference with the operators as to what was
a fair price?
A. Just as it is there. [Referring to the agreement.]
Q. It was an amicable conference fixing the price for 1871?
A. No, sir; the recommendation upon our part was with a proviso estab-
lishing the rates.
Q. I find you were to commence with coal at $2 50 at Port Carbon, out-
side wages $9 00 per week; that was the outside labor?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Don't you think that the outside laborer could support himself at that
rate? -
A. At steady work.
Q. Then the steady work depends upon whether the outside laborer is
ordered to quit or go on by the W. B. A.?
A. No, sir, I think not; I think they often quit without being ordered?
Q. Then it depends upon the association or himself.•'
A. Or his employer.
Q. But here is an agreement by his employer to pay $9 00 per week?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did not you help to fix that price?
A. I helped to recommend it.
Q. Did not you think it was a fair and just price when you agreed to re-
commend it?
A. No, sir, I thought no such thing, but it was the best under the cir-
cumstances.
Q. What were they getting before?
A. Less than $2 50.
Q. Do I understand you that this was an actual increase?
A. An actual increase at $2 50.
Q. Then they were living?
A. I did not hear of any one dying of starvation.
Q. This was an increase?
A. If it had been kept at $2 50 it would have been.
Q. I find inside wages were $10 a week; upon what would that depend?
A. Upon the same sources.
Q. The miner who worked by the day would secure $12 a week if lie
worked; that would depend upon whether he worked or stopped work, or
whether the employer wanted him to go on?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. It was not because you considered this a fair and just table of prices
that you recommended it, but it was purely to avoid any conflict?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Was there any conflict between the men and operators, or any talk
of any conflict, at the time of this agreement?
<pb>
A. There was & prospet that there would be another arrangement arrived
at for the present year.
Q. The workingmen had resumed upon the Gowen compromise of last
year and were working on it at this time?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And this was an arrangement between you, as the representative of
the miners, and the operators, as to the price of work for 1871?
A. A recommendation; yes, sir.
Q. Then you say it was not because you thought this was a fair and just
price, but because you wanted to avoid a conflict when none was threatened?
A. There was one threatened.
Q. In your association?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You had been discussing the propriety of demanding an increase?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Why?
A. Because they thought it was too low.
Q. Is not the idea of your association- to keep up the price of coal in
order that wages can be kept up?
A. You can call it what you please.
Q. You say it is your purpose to keep up the price of wages; don't you
know that if the wages are kept up the price of coal must be kept up to
supply those wages?
A. Certainly.
Q. When men are working upon any basis that may be fixed, don't their
wages rise or fall with the price of coal?
A. Yes, sir; they have been doing so.
Q. As a member of the General Council. do you not know it is a princi-
ple and the policy of that council to order suspensions for the purpose of
keeping up the price of coal and the price of wages?
A. No, sir; the real object we have in view is to deplete the market of
the surplus.
Q. So as to increase the demand for coal at particular times?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. By exhausting the market, then, you know that you put up the price
of coal?
A. It would naturally follow that when an article was in demand it would
demand good prices.
Q. By depleting the market don't you know you render the furnaces un-
able to go on?
A. I do not understand manufacturing.
Q. Don't yon know that by depleting the market you exhaust the supply
of coal?
A. To a certain extent.
Q. The policy of the association is to deplete the market so that there
shall be a very small supply of coal?
A. We have no desire to see the market cleaned out.'
Q. If you keep up simply as much coal as is necessary to supply the mar-
ket, how can the use of coal be extended to places that cannot get it?
A. I don't know.
Q. Is not that the effect of these strikes?
A. Our strikes have never prevented anybody from getting coal, because
we have never held them that long.
Q. How long did you hold them last summer?
A. That was a strike against a reduction; I believe it lasted in the neigh-
<pb>
Lorhood of four months; the places that stopped first did not resume until
after the compromise was accepted; that strike was only in our own county.
Q. You have just said that this strike obtained was only in the Schuyl-
kill regions?
A. I consider that we all depend upon the Reading road.
Q. At the time of that strike the association was in full operation in
Schuylkill county?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Had it extended to the Luzerne and Lehigh region at that time?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Were the miners employed by the three great companies, in the upper
region, members of the association?
A. I believe they were suspended at that time.
Q. What were they suspended for?
A. For refusing to co-operate with the rest when the majority of the
council called for that suspension.
Q. Because they insisted upon going on to work when the council ordered
them not to work?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You suspended them from the council?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. They are now in full harmony and accord with the General Council
to act under its orders.
A. I presume they are.
Q. When were they restored to membership?
A. I don't know—sometime during the latter part of last year; I am
not sure whether they were all admitted or not previous to that reduction.
A. Which was offered?
Q. Were you a day laborer in England?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What were you getting there a day?
A. Three, four and five shillings a day—seven or eight at times.
By Mr. Hall Q. Was the Anthracite Board of Trade organized before
the W. B. A.?
A. They had an organization; I don't know whether the were called by
that name or not.
Q. Is your organization secret 1
A. No, sir.
Q. Is it beneficial?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did the operators say they could not permit to go to work until after
the Philadelphia meeting?
A. Yes, sir; they said they had to negotiate.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. Who said so?
A. The committee; they said they had not power to enter into any nego-
tiations until after the Philadelphia meeting.
Q. Who said this?
A. That committee; I cannot say what individual gentleman said it;
Mr. Kendrick and Mr. Siegfried were on that committee?
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. Where were you born?
A. Ireland.
By Mr. Hall Q. This is a copy of the agreement made with these ope-
rators. [Paper shown witness.]
A. Yes, sir.
Paper offered in evidence by Mr. Hall, and read as follows:
<pb>
CIRCULAR.
At a meeting of the coal trade, at Pottsville, July 29, 1870, the follow-
ing resolutions were adopted:
Resolved, That we, a majority of the signers of the paper of March 15,
1870, agree to resume work on the basis negotiated by F. B. Gowen, Esq.,
president of the P. & R. R. Co., and continue working as long as the terms
will warrant without too great a sacrifice.
Resolved further, That in order to prevent future misunderstandings we
recommend the presidents of the Anthracite Board of Trade and the Work-
ingmen's Benevolent association, to embody in a circular properly signed
by both, their mutual understanding of the points above alluded to,* for
reference in the settlement of any disputes that may arise at. any colliery
between operator and employee.
Agreement made at Pottsville, this 29th of July, 1870, between the Commit-
tee of the Anthracite Board of Trade and the Committee of the Work-
ingmen's Benevolent Association.
It is agreed that the W. B. A. shall not sustain any man who is dis-
charged for incompetency, bad workmanship, bad conduct, or other good
cause; and that the operators shall not discharge any man or officer, for
actions or duties imposed upon him by the W. B. A.
It is further agreed that the spirit and intention of the resolution, (called
the equalization resolution,) passed by the W. B. A., is that each man shall
work regularly, and it is the place of the bosses and operators to see that
he does.
The resolution is, that any miner earning, above expenses, over $100 and
less than $125, shall be reduced 10 per cent, on the basis. Earning over
$125 and under $150, shall be reduced 20 per cent. on the basis. Earning
over $150 and under $200, to be reduced 30 per cent. on the basis. Earn-
ing over $200, to be reduced 40 per cent. on the basis.
For obtaining the price of coal monthly, the president of the Anthracite
Board of Trade and the president of the W. B. A. of Schuylkill county,
shall meet on the 20th day of each month and select five operators, -who
shall, on the 25th inst. following, produce a statement, sworn or affirmed
to, of the prices of coal at Port Carbon, for all sizes above pea coal.
The five operators shall be selected from a list of those shipping over
40,000 tons annually, and none shall be selected a second time until the
list is exhausted.
The price of coal so obtained shall fix the rates of wages for that month,
and this agreement in regard to the mode of obtaining prices shall remain
in force during the year 1870.
By Mr. Hall Q. Is this the first organization of the board of trade?
[Articles of association of the Mahoney Valley and Locust Mountain
ROBT. B. BEATH,
Secretary A. B. of Trade.
WM. KENDRICK,
J. K. SIGFRIED,
M. P. FOWLER,
SAML. E. GRISCOM,
BAIRD SNYDER.
JOHN SINEY,
GEORGE CORBETT,
GEORGE ATHEY,
JAMES BARRY,
ROBT. WEIGHTMAN.
* Contained in the agreement.
<pb>
coal association shown witness, showing that the association was organized
February 10, 1868.]
A. The first that I have any knowledge of.
Enoch P, Evans, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified
as follows:
Q. Where do you live?
A. In Jeddo.
Q. What position do you hold in the W. B. A.?
A. I hold no official position at this time.
Q. What position did you hold in 1870?
A. I was president of the branch in Jeddo.
Q. When did you cease to be president?
A. I cannot remember the date; it was somewhere about the month of
August or the latter part of July.
Q. Who became president in your stead?
A. A gentleman by the name of Neil P. Johnson.
[Witness identified the signatures of several of the notices presented by
Mr. Markle, and testified that the signers of those papers were members of
the W. B. A. at that time. He also identified the seals of the association
attached to said notices.]
By Mr. Hall Q. What was it that Mr. Markle wanted to bind you to?
A. My memory is defective, but I will show you a copy of the letters.
[Witness produces letters published in the Monitor.']
Witness—What gave rise to these notices being served upon Mr. Markle
was because he had introduced into the colliery, and had succeeded in get-
ting a lease signed by a few unlettered men that was found to be injurious
to them; I cannot remember the import of the lease, but I know it was an
objectionable one; we objected to the lease, and politely asked Mr. Markle
if ne would be so kind as to erase the names of those men there on that
lease.
[Anthracite Monitor, of February 5, offered in evidence by Mr. Hall.]
Mr. Lamberton objects, unless the original lease was proved to be lost
or that this was an exemplified copy.
By Mr. Hall Q. Had you a copy of this lease?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you believe this to be an exact copy?
A. Yes, sir; we sent our copy to the Monitor for publication.
Q. They published it as you sent it? •
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What became of the lease Mr. Markle had here the other day?
A. He took it away.
[Copy of lease published in Monitor admitted by the committee.]
Neil P. Johnson, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified as
follows:
Q. Where do you live?
A. In Jeddo, Luzerne county.
Q. Will you state what position you occupied in the association on the
30th of November, 1870?
A. I was president of the branch and am now.
[The witness identifies the signature of Enoch P. Evans.]
Enoch P. Evans, re-called by Mr. Lamberton.
Q. [Paper shown to witness.] Is that an official paper?
<pb>
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall—Q. Were you president of the branch at that time?
A. No, sir.
[Paper shown to witness by Mr. Hall.]
Q. Have you any knowledge about this?
A. Yes, sir; there was an interference upon the part of Mr. Markle with
the agreement entered into between him and his men; he wanted to change
that agreement and change the system of working by the ton or car to
working by the yard or foot.
Q. When did Mr. Markle undertake to do this?
A. Some two or three months previous to our taking any action against
it; we were compelled to do it or stop work; the notice was given in order
to make an arrangement without having a strike.
By Mr. Lambeiton Q. Please state who it was that made this agree-
ment with Mr. Markle?
A. I cannot tell you; Mr. Markle signed it in company with the men.
Q. Then what business had the branch to interfere with the men? What
reason had the branch to interfere with the contract made by Mr. Markle
with the men he had employed to do this work?
A. The men did not interfere; that resolution was to repel the inter-
ference upon the part of Mr. Markle.
Q. It did not relate to the men who were employed by Mr. Markle?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Were not they the proper ones to repel the interference, and not the
branch?
A. The branch are the men.
Q. Did this arrangement affect the individual wages of each man?
A. It would have affected them.
Q. Was the contract made with the branch or with the men?
A. With the men.
By Mr. Hall Q. Was every man who worked for Markle a member of
this branch?
A. I think they were.
John Lloyd, called by Mr. Lamberton, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. Did you occupy any position in the W. B. A. last year? ,
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What was it?
A. I was president part of last year of the district I live in.
Q. You live at Stockton?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Were the men who were employed by Dr. Linderman's colliery mem-
bers of the W. B. A.?
A. Some of them.
Q. What proportion?
A. To the best of my knowledge the majority of the men in that town
were members of the organization.
Q. How many men had Dr. Linderman employed last year at any one
time who were not members of the W. B. A.?
A. Sometimes there may have been a dozen.
Q. How many men were employed by him?
A. Somewhere in the neighborhood of 325.
[Paper shown to witness.]
<pb>
190.
Q. Look at that paper and see if there was such a paper sent by you as
president?
A. I believe this is correct.
Q. Are the signers of that members of the association?
A. I believe they are at present.
Mr. Lamberton.—This is a letter notifying Mr. Linderman to discharge
no Union men.
Q. Look at the names and see if they were members of the association?
A. I am almost sure that these men were out of the Union at that time,
but we did not ask them to discharge those men.
Q. This is a copy of the paper, and these are the names of the men you
notified Doctor Linderman to discharge?
A. We said if they did not join we would suspend.
[Paper shown witness.]
Q. See if this is a copy of the original?
A. Yes, sir; I believe this is a correct copy of the one I received from
Doctor Linderman; I have it at home.
Mr. Lamberton.—I offer now a letter in reply to this communication ad-
dressed to Doctor Linderman; we have not the original. This is a part of
the transaction.
Mr. Hall.—Doctor Linderman can be a witness. I object to any letter.
[Letter admitted and read as follows :1
"New York, June, 1870.
"John Lloyd, President:
"Dear Sir:—We are just in receipt of your order of 20th inst. The
men you refer to are free, moral agents, and by the laws of God and man
we have no right to control their actions in the matter of the freedom of
actions and will. They must follow the dictates of Hheir own conscience.
We have no more right to order them to join the Unions than we have to
ask or order you to leave the Union; therefore, if the works stop you are
responsible, as you have ordered that which is not in our power to have
done. Had you ordered us to discharge them or you would suspend work,
then you would have put it in our power to carry out your order. But
your order is, that they must join the Union, and as we said we cannot
make them do that which they are not willing to do, you will, therefore,
see that the whole responsibility is with you.
"Trusting that you will see this matter in its true light, we are
"Respectfully,
("Signed) "LINDERMAN & SKEER."
At a meeting of the W. B. A. the following resolution was passed:
"Resolved, If those men do not join our association betwixt said date
and Saturday night, June 25th, a suspension will take place on Monday.
June 27th."
By Mr. Hall.—Q. You were about to give some explanation of this pa-
per?
A. This paper was simply to notify Dr. Linderman that if those gentle-
men did not join our organization we would suspend work; we had our
reasons for doing so; when our organization was first started there was
several of our members discharged for joining the organization, and in
order to protect ourselves in the future we asked these men to join our or-.
ganization; the men did so, and we thought it would be better to give
notice that we would suspend at a few days' notice than to suspend without
giving any notice; we thought it just to the employer; we did not wish to
stop his works.
<pb>
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. How many men were there who did not belong to
the Union at the time'!
A. Sixteen out of 350.
Q. Did Linderman and Skeer discharge any of their men without giving
them notice?
A. The superintendent did.
Q. Who was it?
A. William Carr.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. What did he discharge them for?
A. For joining the Union.
Q. I want to ask you whether Mr. Carr, after the suspension, did not
agree to pay the firemen on a basis of $7 50, and was that not all you
asked?
A. He agreed to pay the basis of $5, and the sliding scale.
Q. Did not he agree to pay at the rate of $7 50?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did you order those men to stop their work, when they were being
paid at that rate?
A. No, sir.
Q. Did Mr. Carr, or anybody else, on behalf of Mr. Linderman, see you
in relation to having those men go on with their work?
A. I believe Mr. Carr did speak to me about it; I told him we did not
stop them.
Q. Did you go around to see the firemen yourself to tell them to stop?
A. No, sir.
Q. Were they stopped in pursuance of a resolution of the branch?
A. No, sir; they stopped on their own account.
Q. Do you know Mr. Wolever?
A. I know a Mr. Wolever.
Q. Did he want to withdraw from your association?
A. He never applied at any meeting to withdraw.
Q. Did he ask you for a withdrawal card, and did he say he wanted to
support a large family dependent upon him 1
A. He never asked me for a withdrawal card.
Q. Do you know that he asked any other officer?
A. No, sir.
By Mr. Hall.-^Q. Did you get this paper from Mr. Linderman?
[Paper shown witness.]
A. I got it at their office. .
[Another paper shown witness.]
Q. Where did you get that?
A. I got that in the same way; this is a circular that Linderman issues
from the Coal Exchange, and he reduced our wages twenty-five cents be-
low the basis in December, last year, notwithstanding his agreement.
[Paper read as follows:]
New York Lehigh Coal Exchange, )
New York, December 1, 1870. j
At a meeting held this day, the following prices were adopted for De-
cember shipments at Elizabethport, Port Johnston and Hoboken:
Lump $5 00
Broken 4 75
Egg 4 75
Stove 5 25
Chestnut 4 00
Attest:' JAMES H LYLES, Secretary.
<pb>
Stockton, Pa., December 2, 1870.
'To the W. B. A.:
We do agree to pay the $5 basis until the 10th of this present month.
LINDERMAN & SKEER,
Per Wm. Carr.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. Were the wages reduced?
A. We got a notice to that effect.
Q. Were they reduced?
A. We suspended work; we would not work at the reduction; we have
been suspended since the 10th; we worked on until the 10th of January.
Q. Upon what basis were you paid until the time you were suspended?
A. I cannot recollect.
Q. Was there a strike at that time?
A. No, sir.
Q. When did the strike begin?
A. We stopped on the 9th of January, 1871.
Q. Was the strike caused by that circular 1
A. Yes, sir; that was the starting of it.
Q. Upon what basis did you work all through the month of December?
A. We worked on the $5 basis up to the 10th of December, according to
notice; I am not sure what price we had after the 10th; to the best of my
knowledge it was the $5 basis; I am not perfectly sure.
Q. When did you get that circular?
A. Somewhere between the 1st of December and the 10th.
Q. Was there any action in any of your councils relating to the strike
before that circular was received by you?
A. Not to my knowledge.
Q. No strike was contemplated before that circular was received?
A. There was no action that I am aware of.
Q. Was there discussion relative to the strike before that was received?
A. We did think, according to the notice we got from Mr. Linderman,
that he would pay us the basis up to the 10th; we expected that we would
. suspend after the 10th in order to keep our own basis.
Q. Was there a meeting at Hazleton by any of the council, or those im-
mediately connected with them, to take into consideration the propriety of
the strike before you received that circular?
A. Not to the best of my knowledge.
Q. Was there a meeting of the W. B. A., w,ith relation to the basis upon
which they were going to work?
A. According to hear say there was.
Q. Was there not an agreement to pay $5 for December?
A. I cannot say.
Q. Did not they work right along in December, in pursuance of that
agreement?
A. I cannot say.
Q. Was not this strike ordered by the Grand Council?
A. It was by the request of the members of the W. B. A.
Q. I ask, was it not ordered by the Grand Council?
A. The suspension was ordered.
Q. For what time Was it ordered by the Grand Council?
A. No specified time.
Q. Was it not directed to be commenced on the 10th of January?
A. That was the request.
Q. Was not that the order? ,
<pb>
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Was not this time between the 10th of December and
the 10th of January, a temporary arrangement by which you continued on
the $5 basis?
A. I believe it was a temporary arrangement.
By Mr. Petrikin Q. What position do you hold in the society?
A. I am president of the Stockton district.
Q. Do you get any salary?
A. No, sir.
Q. What are you holding it for now?
A. We don't know what we are holding it for.
Q. Do you know what wages you are asking there now?
A. We have never asked any wages since the suspension took place,
unless it was these terms.
Q. You don't know what would make peace and set you to work?
A. Yes, sir; I do,
Q. Well, what is it?
A. Last year's terms agreement; that is all we ask.
By Mr. Dechert Q. That is what you call the Gowen compromise?
A. No, sir; we do not accept any Gowen basis in our region.
By Mr. Davis Q. Do you get a strike up every year to decrease the
amount of coal?
A. I believe it is necessary to have suspensions sometimes. I have words
to that effect from Doctor Linderman.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. What did he say?
A. He told me that when coal was selling at $5, he was losing money;
when it was selling at $6 at Elizabethport he could just make both ends
meet; I have understood ever since that he did not wish to work when it
was selling below $6.
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. Is there an over-production when the hands are
all at work?
A. I suppose there is.
Q. There are too many hands employed?
A. There is too much coal for the consumption; we do not care how
much coal they produce so long as we can get our wages.
By Mr. Hall Q. What do you say are living wages 1
A. I believe a man with a moderate family might get a bare living at the
$5 basis by working steadily all the time.
Q. Why did you stop when the basis was $5 58?
A. We were offered a reduction.
Q. Did not you receive a circular in January, this year, from Linderman,
giving a basis of $5 50.
A. I cannot answer that question.
Q. Were you not paid on that basis in January?
A. I think we were up to the time.
Q. You struck whilst receiving that basis?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. When a general suspension takes place in the coal region by order of
the association, is it not done for the purpose of increasing the price of
coal?
A. No, sir; not to the best of my knowledge.
Q. What is it for, then?
A. To maintain living wages.
Q. By increasing the price of wages you increase the price of coal?
A. I don't know anything about that.
13
<pb>
By Mr. Hall.—Q. That is what Dr. Linderman says; he wants to in-
crease the price of coal?
A. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lamberton—We will rest here.
Mr. Hall then addressed the committee, insisting that the question be-
fore the committee was entirely a question of law, as to whether the rail-
road companies had gone beyond their privileges.
Adjourned until to-morrow at half-past two o'clock P. M.
Thursday, March. 23, 1871.
Committee met at half-past two o'clock. Present—Messrs. Davis, Dech-
ert, Petrikin and White.
John Brisbin, re-called by Mr. Lamberton.
Q. Were the wages paid by the Pennsylvania coal company, the Dela-
ware, Lackawanna and Western company, and the Delaware and Hudson
canal company, uniformly the same for the last two or three years?
* A. Those three companies have usually paid the same rate of wages;
the Pennsylvania coal company made a small reduction previous to the
three companies joining in the reduction of December 21st; the aim is to
pay the same rate of wages.
Q. How did the wages that were proposed to be paid by your company
and the other two companies compare with the wages offered by the opera-
tors in the Schuylkill and Lehigh regions?
A. The wages proposed to be paid would be equivalent to what the miner
would get under the Schuylkill basis, when coal was at $2 75 at Port Car-
bon; perhaps not quite as much; our wages are fixed wages, and not on
the sliding scale.
Daniel 0. Hitner, called by W. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as f 1-
lows:
Q. Do you know C. B. Nice?
A. I do.
Q. What does he do?
A. Sells coal.
Q. Is he an agent for the operators in Philadelphia?
A. He says so.
Q. Did he tell you he was at the Philadelphia meeting that you have
heard talked about?
A. He did.
Q. Did you have any conversation with him as to what took place be-
tween himself and Mr. Gowen at the Philadelphia meeting, or what he
heard Mr. Gowen state there 1
[Objected to by Mr. Lamberton.]
Mr. Hall—I propose to prove that Mr. Nice went to this meeting at the
instance of the operators, and that immediately after the meeting was over
Colonel Hitner asked him what they had done at the meeting, and that he
said they had not done any thing, and that he then said this: That presi-
dent Gowen said if they went to work at the $3 00 basis he would put the
tolls so high as to prevent any business being done; and further, that if
they carried a small amount of coal on that road he would make them pay
as much as he would if the road was working at its full capacity.
[Admitted.]
<pb>
'By Mr. Hall Q. I understand you to say that this gentleman told you
that he was the agent of the operators; do you buy coal in Philadelphia
from this gentleman?
A. Mr. Nice lives in Norristown; he passes up and down the road gen-
erally twice a day; in regard to this meeting, we were short of coal; I was
in Philadelphia the day the operators met and met Mr. Nice; he told me
there was to be a meeting; I asked him if he was going to that meeting,
and he told me he was; I said to him, "let me know when you come home
what takes place." He stated to me that there was nothing done; he said
he was at the meeting, and that Mr. Gowen cold the operators that if they
went to work on the $3 00 basis he would put up the tolls—for instance, if
they were to carry 40,000 tons he would charge toll that would pay for the
full capacity of the road; that is what Nice told me; he did not say pro-
hibitory tolls.
Q. Has this gentleman an office in Philadelphia?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What is his business?
A. Making iron; he has three furnaces; two of them are in operation
and one out of blast.
Q. Have you or not contracts to supply iron which were made before
the increased rate of tolls?
A. I have—running up to the 1st of July.
Q. Are the rates of toll for coal on the Reading railroad reasonable or
unreasonable?
A. We think they are very unreasonable.
Q. Are they exorbitant 1
A. They are.
Q. Are they in fact prohibitory?
A. We would think them so if we had not contracts to fill.
Q. What do you know about drawbacks on the Reading road?
A. We never had a drawback allowed to us except about 30 days last
year.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. Whereabouts is your furnace?
A. Twelve miles from Philadelphia, on the Schuylkill.
Q. Whereabouts is Mr. Nice's place of business?
A. It is in Walnut street.
Q. Is he a dealer in coal?
A. He is an agent selling coal; that is the only way that I know of his
dealing in coal; he sells to me and other companies.
Q. Did youj have any conversation with him in which he told you that
he was an agent of any operators?
A. Yes, sir; I cannot name the time exactly; he told me he was the agent
for several companies.
Q. On what day was it that he told you he was going to attend a meet-
ing of the operators? #
A. The day of the meeting; I don't recollect the date.
Q. Whereabouts did he have that conversation with you?
A. In Walnut street, near his office.
Q. Did he, on the same day, speak of what had taken place there?
A. I think it was the same evening or the next morning; I asked him
to do it for me and he stopped to let me know.
Q. Did he tell you Mr. Gowen had stated what you have repeated?
A. He did.
Q. Did he tell you who were present at the time?
A. He did not except Mr. Gowen; he did not name any other parties.
<pb>
Q. Did he say where the meeting was held?
A. He did not.
Q. Do you know that Mr. Nice declares that he never said anything of
the sort?
A. He did not say so to me.
Q. You don't know the fact?
A. No, sir; I do not.
Q. What rates of toll are you paying now for any coal you are getting
over the road?
A. $5 15 and $5 30 from Schuylkill Haven to Port Carbon; I am not
sure whether it is to Eagle Bridge or Spring Mill; I am not positive whether
that includes twenty cents on the Norristown branch; I think it does.
By Mr. Hall Q. I understand you to say you are paying that now be-
cause you have contracts which you are obliged to fill, and which run up
to July?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Were you told by the operators of any plan Mr. Gowen said he had
to prevent strikes in the future?
A. I never heard anything but rumor.
Q. How many furnaces have gone out of blast in that neighborhood that
you know of?
A. In our immediate neighborhood there are three.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. At the time you say you were allowed a draw- .
back, were not the rates of drawback published to all the world?
A. I don't know whether they were published or not.
Q. Did you get this drawback by personal application?
A. No, sir.
Q. How was it allowed to you?
A. By the collector; he said there was a drawback; I have seen draw-
backs published regularly during the season to eastern shippers, I think;
we were never interested in it.
Q. Why did the other furnaces go out of blast?
A. Mr. Schall said he could not pay the price of coal.
By Mr. Hall—Q. Why did not you take an interest in drawbacks to
eastern shippers?
A. We did not get the benefit of it.
James Kealey, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as follows:
Q. Where do you reside?
A. Centralia, Columbia county. •
Q. Are you acquainted with the W. B. A.?
A. I am.
Q. What is your position?
A. I am president of the General Council.
Q. Were you president in December, 1869?
A. No, sir.
Q. Were you a member of the council at that time?
A. I was.
Q. Did or did not the council vote to suspend throughout the coal region
about that time?
A. I cannot recollect so far back; they had a vote upon that question in
December, 1870.
Q. Why did they vote to suspend?
A. Because the wages of the workingmen were so low that they could
not sustain themselves.
<pb>
♦
Q. Is the organization incorporated 1
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Has it officers?
A. It has.
Q. Rules and regulations?
A. Yes.
Q. How is it controlled?
A. Controlled by the will of the people composing the W. B. A.; each
man has a vote; when any important question has to be brought before the
council the people »first take action, instructing their delegates how to
vote; they assemble in council, exchange views and take a vote; if the de-
cision of the council is contrary to the wishes of any part of the coal re-
gion, or the members of the association in any part of the coal region,
they are at liberty to reject it; it is not binding upon them unless it suits
their views; if a county or district does not wish to be governed by the
law that is passed, they are at liberty to reject it, and have, in some in-
stances, done so; in the district I live in they have rejected some of the
proceedings of the General Council.
By Mr. Brockway Q. Are the people of your county working now r
A. There is one colliery, I believe, working now, or was when I left.
Q. Whose is that?
A. J. M. Freak's.
Q. What are the benefits of your association?
A. There are a great many benefits arising from the association; if a
member is sick he is supported and visited by brother members; men are
cared for in sickness both financially and otherwise; if a member of the
association dies he is buried by the association whether his folks are in good
circumstances or not; we make it a point that he should be buried by the
association, at their expense; we do not allow the members to impose upon
each other; we make a request, but we do not make it binding, that in
case two members fall out they shall first submit the matter to the associa-
tion before going to law.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. What do you require so far as the morals of your as-
sociation are concerned?
A. If a man is convicted of being a habitual drunkard he is expelled
from the association; if a man presents himself for membership who can
be proved to have been convicted of a felony he is rejected; if a man is
quarrelsome in his own family, it is a black mark against him, whether he
is a member or not.
Q. In a word, you frown upon evil?
A. Yes, sir; in every shape.
Q. And encourage morality?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did you live in the mining region before this association was or-
ganized?
A. I did.
Q. What was the condition of affairs there then as compared with the
condition of affairs there now?
A. Before this association was organized I have seen men making boxes
out of store boxes to bury their children; I have seen men discharged for
asking for $20 when $50 were due them; I have no knowledge of affairs in
the coal regions during the war; I was in the war all the time; I think our
association was chartered in the early part of 1869; before the organiza-
tion we had a great manv evils but the most striking of them was the sell'
<pb>
ing of whisky in the companies' stores to the miners; I 'considered that a
great evil; I don't know how others consider it.
Q. Were the miners obliged to buy things at the stores of operators be-
fore that time?
A. In most all cases they could not get money to buy any where else.
Q. How is it now as to stores—have you co-operative stores?
A. In some places—not in our place.
Q. Would you have co-operative stores if you were imposed upon by
high pi ices?
A. If we had money we would; it is our intention to start them if we
can for the purpose of being the seller and the consumer.
Q. What is your business, independent of mining?
A. I am a justice of the peace; have been so for over two years; I was
in the war all except the first three months.
Q. Did you have these lists in your region that were spoken of by Mr.
Markle?
A. We have had such lists because our people are more intelligent-than
to sign away their rights in that way; I never heard anything of the kind
in our region.
Q. What were the prices of labor when the last suspension took place?
A. I could not tell the exact figures; Centralia was a little better than
Schuylkill county; we resisted the imposition that the operators put upon
Schuylkill county, and we carried our point after two or three weeks stop-
page; my recollection is that the wages ranged from $8 50 to $13 or $12
a week.
Q. You were a member of the organization before you were elected presi-
dent?
A. Yes, sir; and before it was incorporated by the Legislature; we were
first incorporated by the court.
Q. Have you ever known the organization or its officers or men to vio-
late the laws of Pennsylvania?
A. I never knew them to violate the laws of the Commonwealth, accord-
ing to my construction of the laws.
Q. Was or was not the Anthracite Board of Trade incorporated into an
association before yours?
A. I don't know whether it was incorporated or not, but it was an asso-
ciation having monthly meetings.
Q. Do you know of any arrangement that they had among themselves to
ticket?
A. Yes, sir.
[Tickets produced.]
Q. What did they do with these?
A. They were sent from one colliery to another for the purpose of pre-
venting the employment of men; these are designated in our country as
black lists.
Q. That was a man's working death—he would not be employed?
A. No, sir; the men would not be employed whose names were on the
black list; we had men in our place who had to deny their names in order
to get work; when the boss found it out they were discharged; I have any
amount of affidavits to that effect.
Q. I understood you to say that you did not form yourselves into an as-
sociation to protect labor until these men had formed themselves into an
association to protect themselves?
A. Not till after.
By Mr. Petrikin Q. Why were these men's names put on these lists?
<pb>
A. So that each operator could know the names of men that had struck
for wages at any colliery.
By Mr. Lamberton Q. How long have you been a member of the W.
B. A.?
A. Most ever since it existed—since 1868.
Q. When was the General Council incorporated?
A. I cannot give the date; I was not present.
Q. How were you elected president of that association?
A. By a majority of the votes of the representatives of the association.
Q. What counties are included in the coal region that sent representa-
tives?
A. Lehigh, Schuylkill, Carbon, and Northumberland and Columbia; all
those counties sent representatives to the General Council; that body is
composed of thirty-one or thirty-two members.
Q. Is there any salary attached to your office?
A. I don't know whether that would be pertinent to the question; I don't
think I would have the right to ask you how much money you get for at-
tending to this case.
[Question repeated.]
A. I got no salary.
[Question repeated.]
A. No, sir; I got no pay as president of the General Council.
Q. Do you get any pay in New York?
A. I get paid by the people of Centralia when I go to the General
Council—$3 a day and expenses; if I neglect my business they pay me.
Q. Are these delegates elected by ballot?
A. My recollection is that they are.
Q. You have stated that there was a suspension ordered by reason of
their not paying sufficient wages?
A. I think that is right.
Q. At the time that strike was ordered what wages were paid?
A. I have just stated that the wages paid to my recollection, in our sec-
tion, ranged from $8 50 to $13.
Q. Do I understand you to say that a miner who was working by con-
tract only'got $8 50 to $13.
. A. I did not say that.
Q. Do I understand that the highest grade was $13 a week?
A. No, sir.
Q. You are speaking only of the laborers?
A. I am, and of certain miners.
Q. Tell us what classes of men were receiving from $8 50 to $13 per
week?
A. Outside laborers; inside laborers, starters and miners on day's wages.
Q. What were those working by contract making per week on an aver-
age?
A. They averaged according to the position of the men; if a man had a
good place he would make good wages.
Q. What was the average in December?
A. My own would average, perhaps, $65 or $70 a month.
Q. How many days did you work for $65 or $70?
A. I cannot tell you; I think I worked most of the month; I am mak-
ing, perhaps, $800 or $900 a year; to make that I work, perhaps, seven or
eight hours, and, perhaps, nine hours a day; it is very seldom that we
work nine hours, though.
<pb>
I
Q. How long does one have to work in the mines before he becomes a
successful miner?
A. Some never become successful miners.
Q. Do not the wages depend very much upon the skill of the man who
takes the coal out?
A. It makes a great deal of difference whether the boss is his friend or
not.
Q. Does it not depend very much upon the skill of the miner whether
he makes more or less wages?
A. Not at all times; the best skill is baffled sometimes by a wet place
or a difficulty in the vein.
Q. Does the skillful men make more than an unskillful one?
A. If he works more he does; if the skillful man is stronger and has a
stronger constitution he will make more money.
Q. If a skillful man with the same amount of muscle and strength and
as good constitution as an unskillful man, works for the same amount of
time, would he make more than an unskillful miner?
A. I believe he would.
Q. Do you know of any restrictions that have been put upon those
working in a colliery, by the W. B. A., or any branch or member of it, to
prevent any given number of tons being taken out, or one man making
more than?
A. There was no restriction in our section.
Q. Do you know of any as president of the association?
A. No, sir; not as president.
Q. Well, not as president, have you any?
A. I have a slight knowledge.
Q. Tell us what knowledge you have of this kind?
A. I believe I have already stated that no member is allowed to do any-
thing contrary to the morals of the public. We at one time put a restric-
tion upon a man working more than the hours required by the State law—
more than ten hours. We have men who would work a large number of
hours and make a large amount of money for a little while, and then lay
off and their families would be a burden to our association; to prevent
that we passed a resolution prohibiting men from working more hours than
are required by law.
Q. Was it for the purpose solely of seeing the laws of the Common-
wealth enforced that you established that rule?
A. I cannot say what the purpose of the resolution was; I did not offer
it; I cannot state whether it was intended to cover more than that; my
belief is that it was not intended to do anything more than to prevent men
working more than the regular hours.
Q. Do you know of any rule being enforced by any branch or district,
or by the association, so as to restrict the number of tons of coal taken
out in any one day outside of this rule?
A. No, sir; in our section we did not work by the ton; we worked by
the yard.
Q. Do you know in your section of there being any restriction upon
working any number of yards?
A. The one I have named is the only one I know of.
Q. Have you any rule or do you know any introduced by the association
to limit the number of yards to be taken out in a day?
A. Not in our section.
Q. Do you know whether the laborers are restricted from loading above
a certain number of cars a day?
<pb>
A. Not in our section of the country.
Q. Do you know of that rule existing anywhere where the association
has control?
A. I have never worked anywhere else. „
Q. You have produced certain cards here; what do you call them?
A. Black lists, in our section.
Q. Where did you get them?
A. In Centralia. .
Q. Who from?
A. I decline to answer that question.
Q. You have brought them here as evidence, and said they were issued
by operators; I want to know from whom you got them?
A. Sooner than I would tell who gave them to me I would withdraw
them, because I am under strict obligations not to tell where I got them;
I cannot answer, because the person who gave me the cards is in the power
of the operators; he has got a good position, and I promised him, on the
honor of a man, that I would not tell how I got them, and not wishing to
be held in contempt by the committee, I would go to jail before I would
answer. ,
Q. You were speaking of certain rules of your association. If a man
has been expelled from the association will other members of the associa-
tion work in the same colliery with him?
A. They will not work with a contemptible member.
Q. If he has been working for wages below what you think he ought to
get, can he be tried for that?
A. I never saw a man tried for that.
Q. What are the offences for which a man may be suspended or expelled?
A. Drunkenness, fighting and quarrelling, or if he is convicted of a
felony.
Q. Suppose he does not pay his dues? .
A. If he persists in not paying his dues, after being notified, he is ex-
pelled.
Q. If a man fails to pay his dues and is expelled, will the members of
the association work in the same colliery with him?
A. I don't know; we never expelled any one where I reside; we never
had cause to expel them.
Q. Do you know of any causes where the men have been expelled for
non-payment of dues where members of the association refused to work in
the same colliery with them?
A. I do not.
Q. You said that you were elected president—how is that election con-
ducted—by ballot?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Are the delegates to the General Council elected in the same way?
A. I don't know; they are elected by ballot where I reside.
Q. Do you know of any notice being given by the association in your
own part of the country for collieries to stop, or for the men engaged in
them to stop?
A. There may have been such notices; I cannot recollect any part now.
Q. Do you know whether resolutions have been adopted with the men
who belonged to your association shall cease working in any colliery?
A. I cannot remember such a resolution being passed in the immediate
district where I reside; I am not a regular attendant at every meeting of
our district.
<pb>
Q. Within the last year or two do you know of any resolutions being
adopted of the purport I have mentioned?
A. I do not.
Q. Do you know of any collieries that have been stopped in pursuance
of such resolutions?
A. I know of no collieries stopping in obedience to the order of the Gen-
eral Council or the branch.
Q. How often have collieries been stopped by order of the General Coun-
cil within your knowledge?
A. I think twice within my knowledge; I was present at a meeting of
one branch where a resolution was passed, by a most unanimous vote of
the people, that they would not work until a man was taken back who was
discharged; he was discharged because he told the boss that he kept him
in too long, and was demanding more hours of labor than the law required.
Q. Were you present at this conversation that took place between this
man and the boss, so as to know that that was the reason for the discharge?
A. I was not far away; I heard the conversation between this man and
the boss.
Q. And that was the reason of the discharge?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. The branch resolved that the employer must take this man back or
they would stop work?
A. No, sir; it was not put in that way; it was put in such a way that
if he would not let him quit for ten hours he should pay him over-time.
Q. Was that the only stoppage of that colliery when they stopped for a
reason of that kind?
A. The only one I can recollect.
Q. Is that the only case that your branch took action as to the differ-
ences between any member of the branch and the employer?
A. We have taken a great many actions as to tie differences between
the men and employer.
Q. What were those actions 1
A. They were such actions as did not interfere with the work of the col-
liery, and were settled.
Q. This which you have mentioned was the only case where the colliery
stopped?
A. The only one I remember.
Q. Since you have been a member of the association do you know of the
suspension of a large number of the members of the association who were
working in the upper region—the Wyoming region?
A. I have a recollection, but I don't know that I was present at the
meeting when they suspended, but I know such suspension took place.
Q. Do you know these members were all suspended?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What was the reason for that suspension?
A. Not complying with the laws of the council.
Q. Was it permissible for any member of the association to work in the
same colliery with any of those who had been suspended?
A. Oh, yes; they did work there.
Q. What was the violation of the law of the council for which these men
were suspended?
A. I cannot remember any exact violation of the law, but I think the
resolution read that they were suspended for not obeying the laws of the
General Council; the offence was not named.
<pb>
Q. Do I understand that in your association you can cut off a large
number of members without specifying the offence charged?
A. I did not say that; I have given the purport of the resolution.
Q. Have you any personal knowledge of what particular law was vio-
lated by these men by which they were suspended from membership?
A. No, sir; I may guess the reason.
Q. Have they been restored to membership?
A. They have, after asking for admission.
Q. Was the reason for which they were suspended then done away with?
A. I suppose so, or they would not be accepted.
Q. Were they restored under your presidency?
A. I think it was before?
Q. Did you occupy any office in the association at the time they were
restored to membership?
A. I don't think I did.
Q. Were you a delegate to the General Council at the time that the res-
toration to membership was effected?
A. I was.
Q. Don't you know, from being a delegate at the time, what their offence
was, and what the cure was'!
A. I am not certain at which council they were re-admitted; they might
have been admitted at either of two councils; I may have been absent
when they were admitted.
Q. How can we ascertain what violation of law was committed by these
people?
A. The minutes of our association will show.
Q. Would they show the offence for which these men were cut off?
A. I think so.
Q. Who has charge of those books?
A. Our present secretary's name is A. Reese.
Q. Were.you a member of the General Council at the time the general
suspension was directed?
A. I was.
Q. Did the delegates in that council from Schuylkill vote against that?
A. They did; I think all of them.
Q. Were they dissatisfied with their wages at the time the suspension
was ordered, or were they overborne by the delegates from another part of
the country?
A. Where I work we are classified with the Schuylkill region, and we
are governed by them; I know the people in our section were dissatisfied
because the wages were continually reduced, so that they could not earn a
livelihood; when we ceased work there was a good many men in debt on
the store books, and they had been working four months in succession.
Q. Was that indebtedness because of the low wages they were getting or
because of the four months' idlenes last year?
A. I think by both combined; if they had not been idle for the four
months they would not have been so much in debt.
Q. If one who had been working at the usual rate of wages all through
1870, would he have been in debt at the end of the year, if he was a frugal
man?
A. It would depend upon his family and the work.
Q. I will take you as a model; suppose you had work all-the way
through 1870, at the wages you could have earned, would you have been in
debt at the end of the year?
A. No; you must remember that I earn more money than the majority
<pb>
of men in the coal region; I work by contract, and had other ways of get-
ting money.
Q. Taking the laborer who had worked at a given amount of wages dur-
ing 1869, he being a frugal man, and working through 1870 at the same
rate of wages that he received for any month that he did work, could he
not live?
A. No, sir; he could not; at the wages we received in 1869, and with a
family to keep, he might earn enough to sustain them, but he could pro-
cure no clothing nor comforts.
Q. If the operators paid those who worked by contract less, could they
not then afford to pay the laborers more?
A. We have offered that and it has been rejected; I made the offer,
myself, to Mr. Gurrill.
Q. What did you offer to him?
A. My offer was to leave all laboring work, and what is known as nar-
row work, at the basis of 1869, or the $3 basis, and to reduce the contract
work 15 per cent. He said it was the best offer he had heard yet, and that
it was the most sensible thing he had heard yet, and was sorry he could
not accept it; he said the way things stood he would. rather pay the $3
basis until such time as they could regulate wages in Schuylkill; he said
they were put in such a position by the Reading railroad company that
they had to be governed by them: he said: '-' Frank Gowen has the say
now—the association had the say before." I told him I was sorry he could
not accept it and let us go along on it, and that I had a hard time to get
it passed and it was bad after all my trouble to have it rejected; he said
he was sorry, but under the circumstances he would sooner pay the 1869
basis; Mr. Gurrill is an operator.
Q. Were you at Pittston when the General Council met there, and do
j'ou know of any refusal to allow certain collieries to work so that the fur-
naces in the Lehigh valley might be supplied with coal?
A. I think some action was taken; I cannot hardly remember what it
was.
Q. Were you present at that time?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you know whether there was action taken so as to refuse these
collieries permission to work so as to supply those furnaces.
A. My impression was that they would not say anything about giving
them permission.
Q. Could your men work without that permission?
A. I believe they could.
Q. Did you pass a resolution that the members of the association should
not work at those collieries?
A. I don't know whether it was passed in that way or not; my recollec-
tion is that they would not say they should not work; there was a request
by some iron men, and they took action, I think; I will not say positively
what kind of action it was; I think it was a request.
Q. What was the request?
A. I could not say now; I was not present.
Q. Did you vote upon this very question about which I am asking you?
A. We did not vote by ballot.
Q. Did you vote?
A. I think I did; very often I did not vote.
Q. What was the request?
A. I think the request was made to the workingmen for coal; it was a
request to miners for coal; I cannot remember the exact words.
<pb>
Q. Was it a request that your members might be permitted to work in
certain collieries so that the furnaces in the Lehigh Valley might be sup-
plied with coal?
A. That might be; according to my belief these gentlemen asked for
permission to get coal.
Q. Is that the whole truth with regard to the question?
A. Yes, sir; it is.
Q. What action was taken by the council upon that request?
A. I could not state.
Q. Was the request granted or refused, or was it laid on the table?
A. If I remember "right the paper was returned to the gentleman who
presented it.
Q. Did the collieries go to work?
A. I don't know; I never saw them.
Q. Were you present at a meeting of the branch at Centralia when a
resolution was adopted insisting upon Mr. Gurrill taking back a man who
had been neglecting his work on account of drunkenness?
A. No, sir.
Q. Do you know of your own personal knowledge whether that man was
discharged for drunkenness, and whether action was taken by the branch
in relation to the case? <
A. I do not.
Q. Do you know whose hand-writing this is?
[Paper shown witness.]
A.. JS'o, sir.
Q. Do you know any thing about the passage of that resolution or any-
thing about that paper?
A. I know nothing of that transaction.
Q. At the meeting at Pittston, did Gt. W. Pomeroy & Co. ask to run
their colliery for the purpose of supplying Atkins Bro. coal?
A. I think I heard Atkins's name mentioned there; I don't remember the
name of Pomeroy.
Q. Do you know whether there is a firm called Gr. W. Pomeroy & Co.?
A. I do not.
Q. Do you remember voting upon a question in which Atkins Brothers
were concerned?
A. The name of Atkins, I think, was mentioned there in connection with
a paper.
Q. Was that request or any similar one granted by the council?
A. I cannot say.
Q. Do you know whether any consent was asked for by any operators
that members of the W. B. A. should be permitted to go on with the work
in their collieries?
A. I don't know, of my own personal knowledge, of a case where an
operator asked that the members be allowed to go on.
Q. Was there any communication sent any of the council asking per-
mission that the members should go to work in collieries?
A. Those two communications are all that I remember being read or
heard of in that council.
Q. The request, whatever it was, was not granted?
A. I did not say that; I said the paper was respectfully returned. . s
Q. Is that granting or refusing to grant a request?
A. I don't know what you would call it.
Q. Was the consent granted?
A. I have no recollection of what action was taken.
<pb>
Q. Was it not granted?
A. I could not say positively whether it was or not.
Q. Do you remember whether an application was made by Thomas
Rickert similar to that I have been questioning you about?
A. I do not; I never heard the name mentioned there.
Q. When was that General Council held 1
A. I could not name the days.
Q. Was there not one on the first day of February?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. That is the one about which I am speaking, and you were present;
and I have been asking you about transactions that* took place just so
short a time ago? -
A. You bring the meeting at Pittston and that one together.
Q. Was there any meeting of the General Council at Pittston on the 1st
of February, 1871 7
A. No, sir; my recollection is that the meeting was in December; I
would not be positive; I was at the last meeting of the General Council
in Pittston; I think it was in December; I may be mistaken as to dates.
Q. Were you at the meeting of the General Council when a resumption
of work was ordered?
A. Yes, sir; I think it was in December or January; I could not say
which; it was after the strike commenced; I cannot swear as to the date;
to the best of my recollection it was about three weeks after the general
suspension, which occurred, I think, on the 10th of January.
By Mr. Hall Q. Was there a resolution passed at that meeting of the
council ordering a general resumption?
A. Yes, sir; at a meeting in Pittston.
Q. Was it at that meeting that these requests were presented to the
council?
A. I believe it was.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. If your General Council orders a suspension,
what is the penalty imposed upon any one who works for the support of
his family after such order has been issued or such resolution adopted?
A. They have done so and there was no penalty attached; they have
worked after the General Council has ordered a suspension and no penalty
was imposed upon them.
Q. Are your members permitted to work in the same colliery with those
who are not members of the association?
A. They are permitted to work but they are not permitted to be mem-
bers of the association?
Q. They must cease to be members of the association?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall—Q. I understood you to say that you would have made
$800 or $900 a year if you worked continuously. I suppose you mean
that out of that you would have kept your family?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How large was your family?
A. A wife and three children.
Q. If you earned $800 or $900 a year, would you then get more than the
average workman would get in the coal mines?
A. Far more than the majority would get.
By Mr. Petrikin.—Q. How many members are there in your organiza-
tion!
A. The last estimate was in the neighborhood of 35,000.
Q. Are they confined entirely to the anthracite region 1
<pb>
A. They are.
Q. None in the bituminous region?
A. We have not enumerated any in the 35,000.
Q. In time of strikes do the members of your association, when not at
"work, receive any money out of the contingent fund.
A. In our district we have supported families since the second week of
the suspension, out of the contingent fund.
By Mr. Hall Q. Is there suffering in that region?
A. There is extreme suffering from want and starvation all over the re-
gion I come from; they are in extreme want.
Q. What are they living on?
A. I cannot say; I have heard assertions.
By Mr. Brockway.—Q. Since the formation of the association have you
ever known an advance for contract work, without asking an advance on
the day work?
A. I have never known an advance upon contract work without an ad-
vance upon day's wages also.
Q. Are not your men frequently compelled to suspend labor because of
the mines being flooded, and on account of breakage or damage to ma-
chinery?
A. Yes, sir; one colliery has been burnt down recently, and the men
thrown out of employment—I suppose some 250.
By Mr. Lamberton.—Q. What are the dues paid to the association?
A. Each member pays 25 cents.
Mr. Hall offered in evidence charter [of the W. B. A., act approved 11th
March. 1870; Pamphlet laws of 1870, pages 399 and 400.
Adjourned until 8 o'clock this evening.
EVENING SESSION.
Committee met at 8 o'clock.
James Kealey, re-called by Mr. Lamberton.
[Anthracite Monitor, dated February 11,1871, purporting to contain the
minutes of the meeting of the General Council W. B. A., held at Pittston,
January 31st and February 1st, 1871, shown witness.]
By Mr. Lamberton Q. Will you look at these minutes, and especially
at the afternoon session, and say, according to the best of your recollec-
tion, knowledge and belief, whether that is a correct account of the pro-
ceedings, so far as it relates to that particular subject?
A. That is correct, according to my recollection.
[Mr. Lamberton read from the paper as follows:]
"The communications from the Parryville and Lehigh valley furnaces,
and one from the L. V. R. R., were taken up, and, after a lengthy discus-
sion, covering every feature of the question, the council decided that, un-
der the circumstances, we do not deem it expedient to grant the requests
therein made. The communications were respectfully returned with the
above decision.
"Communications were also presented from Gr. W. Pomeroy and the West
Lehigh colliery, asking the association to allow its members to work their
respective collieries, to supply certain furnaces with coal. Respectfully
returned with the aforementioned decision."
Witness—The last paragraph is what I remember, according to my know-
ledge and belief.
Adjourned until to-morrow at half-past two o'clock P. M.
<pb>
Friday, March 24, 1871.
Committee met at half-past two o'clock P. M.
Present—Messrs. Davis, Deckert, Petrikin and White.
Mr. Hall presented testimony of Franklin P. Drinker, taken by agree-
ment of counsel.
Franklin P. Drinker, affirmed.
Examined by C. B. Brockway.—I reside in Bloomsburg, Columbia coun-
ty; I am clerking for the Bloomsburg iron company; I attend generally to
the coal and iron shipments; one of our furnaces is in blast and one has
been out since fall; since Januarj- 1, we have got ten cars of coal per day
for a part of the time from Hutchinson, at Kingston, and five cars per day
from Shickshinny; we get it over the Lackawanna and Bloomsburg rail-
road company; the railroad company call the distance from Shickshinny
to Bloomsburg 24 miles; we pay $2 20 freight per ton from there since
February 20, 1871; before then we paid $1 00 per ton; they charge us the
same from Kingston, which is about 38 or 40 miles from Bloomsburg; we
get our limestone from Upper Lime Ridge over the same road; it is six
miles from Bloomsburg; we pay 25 cents per ton; we get it on our own
cars; we send our pig iron to Rupert in summer by the canal, and in win-
ter haul it in wagons; we find it cheaper than sending it over the Lacka-
wanna and Bloomsburg railroad company; the railroad company charges
40 cents per ton from Bloomsburg to Rupert; the distance is about two
miles; these rates seem unreasonable, but at Rupert the company have con-
siderable shifting; our company is not satisfied with these rates but have
never made any complaint; we now pay $1 25 at the colliery, about more
for coal per ton than before the raise in freights.
Cross-examined by J. Brisbin, Esq The coal is transported in cars be-
longing to the company; Charles R. Paxton is president of our company;
I have been employed by the company (iron company) from fifteen to
twenty years; we paid, previous to May, 1870, or thereabouts, thirty cents
per ton for transporting limestone; the limestone is weighed at the furnace;
the charge is based on what a car is assumed to carry; the actual weight
is, on the average, greater than the assumed weight; the car is assumed to
carry five tons; they average, I think, five and one-fourth tons—fully that;
by a ton I mean 2,240 pounds; I think it was an understanding between
Mr. Bound and Mr. Paxton that the railroad company should receive
twenty-five cents per ton for the transportation of limestone, it being as-
sumed that the car contained but five tons; the price of coal at the col-
lieries was not increased before the raise of freight; we think the increased
price of coal at the collieries was in consequence of the suspension; the
company has always charged the same rate from Pittston, Plymouth and
Shickshinny; it is about forty-nine miles from Pittston to Bloomsburg;
we would avefage to Rupert twelve cars of iron per week during the year;
a four horse team will haul four loads per day, and take from ten to twelve
tons per day; we pay $4 00 per day per team of two horses; a four horse
team, I think $6 00; in my judgment it would not be an object, pecuniarily,
for the company to haul our iron at such rates as they now charge; I think
they don't want to haul at any price; the cars would be detained about
one day in loading; about twelve hours in unloading.
Re-examined—I did not hear Mr. Paxton say he had agreed to the charges
of the railroad company.
F. P. DRINKER.
<pb>
Mr. Hall read a letter from John E. Rathbun, addressed to the W. B. A.,
as follows:
Trevorton, July 5, 1870.
To the Workingmen's Benevolent Association:
I received, yesterday, a circular Irom the Reading railroad company, an-
nouncing an advance of tolls equal to $1 30 per ton on all coal sent over
their road, to take effect on Friday next, the 8th inst.
This advance will compel me to suspend my colliery, as I can sell no
coal with this advance added. If no change occurs before that time I
must shut down on Thursday night.
JOHN E. RATHBUN.
Richard Williams, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified a3 fol-
lows:
Direct examination.—I reside at Hazleton, Luzerne county; am a miner;
have been working at the. coal business in the neighborhood of 40 years;
I heard Mr. Kealey's testimony here; to the best of my knowledge his tes-
timony in relation to the W. B. A. is correct; they pay $5 a week during
sickness and $50 at death; I have been a member of the association two
years; the operators had associations in our district before ours was organ-
ized; they were formed a long time before ours; they were formed to pro-
tect their interests, antagonistic to ours; on Dec. 10,1870, we were notified
by the chairman of the Board of Trade that they could not pay us the $5
basis any longer; the operators had a black list; I remember their fixing
the wages of laborers, irrespective of the price of coal, in 1861 and 1862.
Cross-examined by Mr. Gowen.—There might have been a change when
the war commenced; that low rate might have been established in 1859 or
1860; I am not sure which; I never heard of the operators breaking up
during those years; I have been living in the Hazleton region about thir--
teen years; I saw the black lists hanging up in the different offices of the
operators of the mines; I am president of the branch there; am 56 years,
old, and was brought up as a miner since I was able to work; I am now &.
member of the Legislature of the State of Pennsylvania.
Q. It does not look as if it was a very undignified position to be a miner
if you have assumed such a position—you are not much down-trodden?
A. No, sir.
Q. Your health is good 1
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall.—You might have looked ten years younger at least if you
had not been at this business so long?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Gowen—Q. Did not the Lehigh operators pay the $5 00 basis in
December?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did not they pay in January $5 50?
A. Yes, sir; to the 10th of January, but it was perfectly well understood
that the contract expired on the 10th.
Q. In January, as long as the work lasted, until the suspension was Or-
dered, it was $5 50?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Hall.—Q. Do you remember the time when there was a terrible
L system or reign of terror. or whatever you choose to call it, in the coal re-
I gions?
A. I shall remember it as long as I live; for a long time in the Hazleton
14
<pb>
region they had a very bad system; they paid us all in store goods; of
course, some who were a little honorable paid $5 or $10 a month in cash;
in some places they charged extraordinary prices for powder—more than
we could purchase it for ready cash; it was no use for a man to speak
above board to any of these gentlemen, because he knew it was immediate
death or discharge, and then he might look in some other quarters for em-
ployment; under these circumstances the men got so low that this mob of
about 100 armed men would go at night with their muskets and notify all
the places not to work; they carried it on until this organization was formed.
Q. "What was the effect of this organization in that region?
A. It did away with the reign of terror.
Q. Did you ever work for George Markle?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. What did he pay?
A. I commenced working in November and I was paid in July the fol-
lowing year; he lost the key of the safe, and there was no money circulated
during that time; 'that was the system of payment.
By Mr. Petrikin Q. When was this that these armed men went out at
night?
A. In 1856 and 1857 I think.
Q. There were other organizations before this was established?
A. Oh, yes; this is not the same organization; any man can come to us
at any time but he must not betray his fellow-men.
By Mr. Gowen Q. What year was this that you commenced working
and did not get paid until July?
A. I believe in 1859.
Q. Did you work all the time from November until July?
A. Tes, sir; but the work was very little; I believe the portion coming
to me was only $50 or so.
Q. You got something on account?
A. Yes, sir; molasses and calico, &c.
Q. Did he make money?
A. I believe they commenced with a capital of $60,000; in 1864 or 1865
that capital was watered, and they ealled it $500,000, and at the nearest
calculation that I can make, that gentleman made sometimes during the
war 300 per cent.; I should like to find the same job myself.
Q. That was the Mr. Markle examined here?
A. Yes, sir.
William Waters, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
fows:
I am a member of the W. B. A.; have been a member for about two
years; I heard Mr. Kealey's statements yesterday in regard to the W. B.
A.; to the best of my belief it was correot; I have been a member since
November of a committee that was in the habit of meeting with a commit-
tee, of which Mr. Kendrick was one, when he represented the interests of
the Board of Trade; our committee represented the W. B. A.; in Novem-
ber, 1810,1 understood that the tolls from Port Carbon to Philadelphia,
on the Reading railroad, were $2 08; Mr. Kendrick did not say anything
to me at that time about those tolls being exorbitant; in answer to a ques-
tion of mine, he did say, to the best of my recollection, as follows: It was
on the 24th of December, he being ehairman of that committee or a mem-
ber of the committee; to the best of my knowledge I asked him if he did
not consider it an extortion, in fact amounting to tyranny on the part of
the Reading railroad to charge them, as operators, such heavy tolls as they
<pb>
were charging them at that time; Mr. Kendrick answered me and said:
"That is the light we take it in."
Q. You have heard the paper read which has been called a proposition
or recommendation for adjusting wages for 1871; I wish you to state
whether the proposition was adopted by the W. B. A. of Schuylkill county?
A. It was not; I know George W. Cole; he was in the habit of meeting
us; I did not see him when he was examined here.
Q. State whether you had a conversation with George W. Cole, on the
29th of December last, and whether he said anything about having to sus-
pend unless you did?
A. He said: "If you will not suspend we shall have to suspend."
Cross-examination I live in Ashland, Schuylkill county; have been on
a committees of the W. B. A. once before; I presume this conversation I
had with Mr. Cole was after the W- B. A. had ordered a general suspension
on the 29th of December; I don't remember the date when the general sus-
pension was ordered; I know by hearsay that it was ordered to commence
on the 10th of January; I presume the order had been promulgated, but I
have no evidence of the fact; I believe the order had been promulgated
before this conversation with Mr. Cole.
James Ryan, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as follows:
I reside Mahanoy City; my business is a miner; I have been a member
of the W. B. A. for over two years; the proposition for the adjustment of
wages for 1871, which was recommended by Mr. Siney, was not adopted
by the W. B. A. of Schuylkill county; on the 29th of December, 1870, I
was one of the committed that met the committee of the Anthracite Board
of Trade in Pittston; Mr. Kendrick said that if we would not suspend
they would have to suspend.
Cross-examination This was after the suspension had been ordered; I
signed that proposition; we submitted it to our people and were governed
by them afterwards; I thought perhaps it might be right if they said it was;
I went to see Mr. Gowen about it.
Q. Were you not then under the impression that there would be no trou-
ble about its being accepted?
A. I didn't know anything of the sort.
Q. Was not that your impression?
A. No, sir.
John Foley, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as follows:
I reside at Mount Carmel; am a miner and have been for twelve years,
and have worked about the mines for twenty years; I heard the statement
of Mr. Kealey yesterday about the association; it is correct so far as my
judgment goes; I am a member of the association; I heard Mr. Eastwick's
testimony; immediately after the murder at Mount Carmel, to which I re-
ferred here, our district called a meeting, and at that meeting we offered
a reward of $500 for the .arrest and conviction of the party or parties
who committed it.
C. J. Foley, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as follows:
I live at Danville; have lived there about 25 years; am a member of
the National Labor Union; I heard Mr. Beaver's testimony; I am assistant
secretary of the local union and recording secretary of the Grand Lodge;
the union at Danville, to the best of my knowledge, numbers between 2,400
and 2,500 men at present; I was one of the committee sent by Mr. Beaver
to the miners for the purpose of making some arrangement; had a conversa-
<pb>
tion with Mr, Beaver before I went; I asked him the question whether there
w-as any differences between himself and the men about wages; he told us
we could tell them he was willing to pay the basis we were working upon
then, and pay whatever was settled upon by the General Council afterwards;
that wages were no object to him and that he wished the coal; we went
to see the men, and in conversation with them we found they were willing
to work and would resume in a few days; we went back and made report
to Mr. Beave>; he seemed pleased with it and said he thought it would be
a great benefit in the future; the furnaces went on until the raise of tolls,
and then they had, to blow out; I had a conversation with Mr. Michael
Groves last Saturday; he is an iron man; I asked him if he was going to
work again; he stated that so long as the tolls kept up he could not put
his furnaces in blast—it would not pay him; he could not afford to pay
the tolls; his furnaces are not running now.
Cross-examined.—I was at the Kingston colliery; the men did not men-
tion any basis; I don't know that they asked to be paid on the $9 50 basis
at Elizabethport; we made report to Mr. Beaver that we would have coal
enough in a few days; we did not, because the tolls were put hp; I don't
know that the colliery stopped because the tolls were put up; I believe the
reasons were that the furnaces were blown out shortly after; I heard Mr.
Beaver say that he offered the $9 50 basis and they refused; I think it was
the 4th of February that I went up to that colliery; the tolls on the Lacka-
wanna and Bloomsburg road were put up about the 20th of February.
H. S. Hallernan, called by Mr. Hall, being dul^ sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
I reside at Danville; I know Mr. Markle, partner of Thomas Beaver;
haii a conversation with him on the 20th of February, 1871; he spoke to
me in regard to freights on coal and the scarcity; he told me that it was
an imposition upon the public; he told me they would have to blow out
their furnaces, and did blow out; from 1,500 to 2,000 persons were thrown
out of employment by stopping the different furnaces and mills; there is
great suffering in our region at the present time; men are suffering from
the want of bread.
Cross-examined.—My business is blacksmithing; I had this conversa
tion with Mr. Markle after the 20th of February; some of the furnaces had
blown out before that; two, I think, were blown out before this conversa-
tion.
Neil P. Johnson, re-called by Mr. Hall.
I have worked for Mr. Markle; I worked for him from the spring of 1858
up to the suspension; my name is signed to a paper given in evidence; I
acknowledge the paper; that notice was caused by his wanting to break
our agreement—an agreement we had with him in writing; in our agree-
ment we were allowed forty-eight feet for a ton of coal, and he wanted more,
and the men would not agree to it.
Cross-examination I am president of the Jeddo branch of the W. B. A.
Thomas Mullery, called by Mr. Hall, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. Who signed that paper?
[Paper shown witness.]
A. Mr. Detmold.
Q. It states the agreement made between him and the men?
A. Yes, sir.
<pb>
Mr. Hall offered in evidence, and read the following clause from the
paper:
"It being understood that $5 per ton of coal in market, or 885 cents per
drift, from No. 5 slope, (and from the other slopes in proportion,) shall at
all times be considered the minimum price at which operations shall be
continued; and below that all mining, preparing and shipping of coal shall
be stopped."
Mr. Hall closed with the exception of offering certain documents, includ-
ing a statement of the freight tariff on the Reading railroad on coal, the
charter and supplements of the Reading railroad company, the by-laws of
the W. B. A. and Anthracite Board of Trade, and the National Merchant
Union.
Mr. Gowen said he would close this testimony next Tuesday afternoon
in one hour.
Adjourned until Tuesday at four o'clock P. M.
Tuesday, March 28, 1871.
Committee met at four o'clock P. M.
Present—Messrs. Davis, Dechert, Petrikin and White.
Henry L. Cake re-called for the cross-examination by Mr. Gowen.
Q. I notice in the opening of your examination before the committee
that you spoke of wanting to be careful of what you stated, for the rea-
son that you understood that efforts had been made to drive you out of
the coal business?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you mean that any railroad company, or the Reading railroad
company, had ever intimated anything of that kind?
A. No, sir; it did not come from any railroad company; it came from
the operators who were antagonistic to me; the impression created upon
my mind was that they were to use influences with the railroad companies;
I had nothing tangible.
Q. You spoke of a discrimination by the Reading railroad company in
reference to coals, and you mentioned Millersburg coal and your own coal?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Is not Millersburg an entirely different region, and does not that coal
come over a different route?
A. I can tell where the misapprehension occurred; I stated that oui-
usual route was by way of Port Carbon to Richmond, about 106 miles, but
on account of the very small amount of coal going to market in that di-
rection they were not working the plane, and it took a longer route to Ta-
maqua; I stated that our coal, which might go by the 106 mile route, was
charged the extra amount by way of Tamaqua, but that the other coal, the
Lykens valley that came from Millersburg, was carried through Harrisburg;
I did not complain of the amount that the Reading railroad charged, but
I complained of the discrimination.
Q. It was not coal from the same locality 1
A. No, sir; it was the Lykens valley coal.
Q. Do you know of any discrimination, whatever, in reference to the
Schuylkill or Shamokin, or any of those regions, by the Reading railroad,
excepting the results of some contracts with the Mine Hill railroad com-
pany?
<pb>
A. I don't know that; I said that a gentleman did tell me that there was
something queer about another colliery; they insisted upon the name, and
I gave Mr. Freck's; a gentleman named Spofford told me that Mr. Freck
was selling his coal at a price that little more than covered the amount of
tolls that was charged upon ours at Richmond; he said Mr. Freck paid the
tolls, and other circumstances made it look as though it might be a dis-
crimination; I don't say that there was, but I heard there was something
of that kind; I don't know the fact. •
Q. Can you, at your colliery, sell coal at a profit at $2 50 when you pay
the $3 as a minimum? *
A. Yes, sir; on the Gowen modification.
Q. Would you, as an operator, feel like stopping your colliery when coal
was bringing $2 50 if you had the Gowen compromise in force?
A. No, sir; I could sell coal at $2 50 with that; when the basis of 1869
was in operation we never thought of stopping when certain classes of coal
brought $2 50; as long as it averaged above that we were willing to go on.
Q. Is it not perfectly feasible for a good colliery like yours, working
upon the Gowen compromise or the $2 50 basis, to produce coal and sell
it at $2 50.
A. Yes, sir; I think at that figure an average colliery could get along;
but there are collieries in Schuylkill county that could not work.
Q. Could not yours?
A. Yes, sir; I do not want any better business than at that rate.
Q. Do you know any reason why, if it is a good business at that rate,
the consumer should be forced to pay fifty cents a ton more for it?
A. There is no good reason; there might be times when the consumer
could get it at less, and he might be compelled at times to pay $3; I don't
think the price of coal has fluctuated so much as the tolls and freights; 50
cents is a good deal of margin in coal.
Q. You have seen coal sell at $2 at the mines?
A. Yes. sir.
Q. And at $7?
A. I don't think I had much to do with coal that sold at $7; I desire to
state to the committee that in my first examination, among other things, I
stated that in conversation with a gentleman he stated to me that the im-
pression had been created, or was created, or would be created, that there
would be an early resumption, and that prevented parties from buying our
coal; I met him since, and talked it over,-and he says that what he did
say was that the impression that there would be an early resumption would
prevent our selling our coal; Mr. Lamberton insisted upon the name and I
gave him the name of Benjamin Thomas; I think my statement was that
he said that the impression had been, or would be created, that there would
be an early resumption, and so prevent parties buying coal.
Q. What is your opinion as to the price that coal would realize if work
was commenced on the 1st of April, for the next three months?
A. I do not think it would be advisable for an operator to undertake to
mine coal above $3, and I don't think such a state of affairs could be
brought about, to bring it umder $2 50 this year.
Q. If you could run your colliery six months out of the year you would
take $2 50?
A. I would take that at the breaker.
Q. For all sizes?
A. I don't know that I would be willing to start to-day; I would be
willing to commence on the 1st of January and run through the year; my
experience is not altogether gathered from the mining of coal; I have been
in the manufacturing business.
<pb>
J. M. Freck, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly sworn, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. You have a colliery at Centralia, shipping over the Mine Hill railroad
to Schuylkill Haven?
A. At one time we shipped that way; latterly to Port Carbon.
Q. You have been shipping lately?
A. I am shipping now.
Q. State whether you feave had any private drawbacks, or promise or
agreement of any kind, which refers to the tolls of the main line from Port
Carbon down—what rates have you paid?
A. I have no rates on the long road, and never did; I deliver my coal at
Tamaqua at present; I pay the lateral tolls to Tamaqua; at Tamaqua the
consignee pays it.
Q. Have you any arrangement whereby the consignee gets any benefit
on the main line on your coal?
A. No, sir; we never had any; never asked for any.
Q. Your colliery had a contract with the old Mine Hill road?
A. Yes, sir; but the Reading road leased it.
Q. State what the rate was that they were to charge you?
A. The agreement, I think, was one and a-half cents a ton per mile for
tolls, one-eighth of a cent for car service, to Schuylkill Haven.
Q. When was that contract made?
A. In 1862.
Q. Before the Reading company leased the road?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. How long is it to last?
A. During the time of the lease, or the renewal of the same.
Q. How far are you from Port Carbon?
A. I think it is seventeen miles; my lateral tolls are twenty-five cents.
By Mr. Hall Q. How much do you pay to Tamaqua?
A. Eighty-three and seven-tenths.
Q. How many miles?'
A. I cannot tell; I believe it is calculated at three and a-half cents a ton
per mile; I don't know the distance; I think that is the charge of the lat
eral road.
Q. Are you paying more than the contract prices?
A. I have no contract that way, at all; they are now taking my coal by
way of Tamaqua instead of by way of Port Carbon.
Q. What were the rates on this lateral road?
A. My rates to Port Carbon were twenty-five and a-half cents per ton.
Q. Now how much?
A. Eighty-three and seven-tenths between my colliery and Port Carbon.
Q. I understand you to say that you pay eighty-three and seven-tenths
for what you paid twenty-five cents and a fraction—it is for taking coal
from the same point to the same point, but it takes it another way?
A. Yes, sir; instead of taking it the direct road it takes it around.
Q. It goes through the tunnel?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Are you a shipper?
A. I am.
Q. Is there any body else shipping in that country?
A. Not in my neighborhood.
Q. How do you come to be shipping?
A. Well, I seem to be in the good graces of both parties; I am shipping
by consent of the W. B. A. and the Anthracite Board of Trade.
<pb>
Q. Are you paying the basis of $3?
A. I am.
Q. Hence they are satisfied?
A. Yes, sir. ,
Q. And as you pay the railroad freights they are satisfied?
A. I suppose so.
Q. As nobody else has any business I suppose you are making some
money and that satisfies you?
A. I have not been able to figure it up.
Q. You are the only person doing business in that neighborhoodf
A. Yes, sir.
Eugene Borda, called by Mr. Gowen, being duly swoin, testified as fol-
lows:
Q. General Cake testified that you had some conversation with him
about a conversation in regard to putting , a fancy rate being put up.
Give your recollection of what occurred?
A. I met Gen. Cake in New York; he asked me if I had been to any meet-
ing; I told him, "yes;" he asked me if they would meet again; I told him,
"yes;" he asked me what was done, and I told him, "nothing;" he asked
me about the tolls and I told him the tolls would be up the next day on
the Reading road; he asked how much; I told him it was double to Phila-
delphia—what was $2 would be $4; that was the first raise; I believe this
took place on the 15th of February; it was on the 16th the raise took place;
I knew it would take place, because Mr. Gowen had shown me the printed
list in the morning in the cars going to New York.
Q. State whether on the road to New York to attend that meeting you
did not see the printed list of advanced tolls on the Reading road?
A. Yes, sir; you [Mr. Gowen] showed it to me and several of the gen-
tlemen; that was before the meeting.
By Mr. Hall Q. You speak of a printed list that had not gone into
effect and that did not go into effect until the next day after the meeting?
A. It was a printed sheet—a proof sheet; Mr. Gowen told me he ,had
got it struck off the day before and it would take place the next day.
Q. It did not take place until the next day?
A. It took place the next day; on the morning of the 15th Mr. Gowen
showed me the circular and said it would be circulated that day among the
operators and shippers, to take effect the next day.
Q. What you saw was the proof sheet?
A. Yes, sir; that must have been printed on the 14th.
Q. This meeting was on the 15th and you were at it?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You heard what Mr. Gowen stated there?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And the raise on the Reading road took place the next day?
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Gowen.—Q. The tolls took effect on the next day?
A. Ye?, sir.
Q. What has been the custom in regard to new freights with reference
to time?
A. We always get notice before they take place, at least one day.
Q. And this printed list of advanced tolls you saw in the morning at
what time?
A. We left at half-past seven in the morning; I saw it in the car.
Q. You saw the rates before the meeting took place 1
<pb>
A. Yes, sir.
By Mr. Petrikin Q. Did you have another meeting after the 15th?
A. Yes, sir; there was a meeting of a committee of the different regions
to compare wages; that was about wages.
By Mr. Hall Q. When was that?
A. It took place the next day.
Q. Did that committee fix the rate of wages?
A. They did not fix the rate of wages; they compared notes and tried
to find out what the rate of wages would be in Lehighif the basis was $2 50
in Schuylkill.
Q. Did you fix the rate of wages?
A. We did not.
Q. You was at that meeting?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You heard what Mr. Go wen stated?
A. Yes, sir.
Adjourned until to-morrow afternoon at three o'clock, at which time ar-
guments of counsel are to be heard.
H. J. MASON, Stenographer.
EXHIBITS.
Statement of the capital stock of the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western
railroad company, outstanding January 1, 1865, and of the increase since
that date.
Amount outstanding January 1, 1865 $10, 247,050
January, 1866, issued, (to represent earnings,) 1,016,550
May, 1866, issued, (to purchase property,) 25, 000
June, 1867, issued, (paid for in cash,) 2, 812, 000
December, 1869, issued, (paid for in cash,) 2, 000, 000
August, 1870, issued, (paid for in cash,) 2, 708, 250
Outstanding December 31, 1870 18,808,850
A. J. ODELL, Treasurer.
City and County op New York,
and State of New York,
 
A. J. Odell, being duly sworn, says that he is the treasurer of the Dela-
ware, Lackawanna and Westen railroad company, and that the above state-
ment is correct, as shown by the books of said company.
A. J. ODELL. .
Sworn and subscribed before me, this")
27th day of March, A. D. 1871. j
CHAS. E. CARRYL,
A Commissioner for the State of Penn'a in the State of N. Y.
<pb>
Statement of dividends paid by Delaware, Lackawanna and Western rail-
road company, upon its capital stock, commencing on the 1st day of Jan-
uary, 1865.
Date.
~~18657
Jan. 20,
1866.
Jan. 20,
Jan. 22,
July 10,
1867.
Jan. 2,
July 22,
July 22,
1868.
Jan. 15,
Jan. 15,
July 20,
July 20,
1869.
Jan. 20,
July 20,
1870.
Jan. 20,
July 20,
Dec. 31,
Stock.
¥10,247,050
10,247,050
11,263,600
11,288,600
11,288,550
11,288,550
56,000 shs. scrip'
'$11,288,600
56,083 shs. scrip
$11,288,600
56,240 shs. scrip
$14,100,600
14,100,600
15,927,500
16,100,600
18,808,850
Rate.
Amount divi-
dend.
5 per ct.,
10 do...
5 do...
5 do...
5 do...
5 do...
♦75 cts.
5 per ot.,
*$1 56J
5 per ct.,
*$2 08'3
5 per ct.,
5...do..
5...do.
5...do.
6...do.
$512,352 50
1,024,705 00
563,180 00
564,430 00
564,427 50
564,427 50
42,000 00
564,430 00
87,629 69
564,430 00
117,166 50
705,030 00
705,030 00
796,375 00
805,030 00
1,128,531 00
How paid.
Cash.
$101,650, stock; $3,155, cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
Cash.
$1,110.500, M. and E.
[227 90, cash.
stock ;f $16,-
* Per share.
f Market value, 86 per cent.
ss:
A. J. ODELL, Treasurer.
City and County of New York,")
and State of New York, j"
A. J. Odell, being duly sworn, says that he is the treasurer of the Dela-
ware, Lackawanna and Western railroad company, and that the above state-
ment is correct, as shown by the books of said company.
A. J. ODELL.
Sworn and subscribed before me, this")
27th day of March, A. D. 1871. J
CHAS. E. CARRYL,
A Commissioner for the State of Penn'a in the State of N. Y.
Agreement made between the coal operators and workingmen of Northum-
berland county, as a basis for labor in coal mining during the year 1871.
It is mutually agreed to work for and pay the $3 basis of 1869, with a
sliding scale of 33 per cent. up and down, with the agreement on the part
of the operators that they will pay the basis the first month that the aver-
age price of coal falls below $3, but not after that.
Suamokin, February 13, 1871.
(Signed on the part of the workingmen.)
JOHN FOLEY,
JAMES T. HARRIS,
MARK MORAN,
MICHAEL PEPPER,
J. M. LONG.
(Signed on the part of the operators.)
C. W. KINGSLEY,
A. FULTON,
A. M. MONTELIN.
<pb>
J
COLORADO COLLIERY—1870.
MONTHS.
January
February..
March
April
May
June
July
August
September.
October
November.
December..
~ o
81
297
300
273
362
450
409
455
339
404
348
330
4,048
>
3.8
as
$3,635 92
8,880 56
15,852 46
3,668 96
16,056 51
26,896 60
22,561 16
2b, 599 28
5,548 39
18,583 79
16,354 74
15,501 42
Powder, &c.
174,139 79
J103 00
58S 06
923 04
251 40
944 45
1,634 55
1,552 12
1,562 50
392 82
1,381 90
1,386 80
1,242 35
11,962 99
Amount paid
$4,419 12 1
11,113 19
1,011 02
10,757 14
18,201 00
14,297 19
16,065 16
3,605 01
14,803 01
15, 111 06
15,394 12—124,781.02 tons.
162,176 80=?10 06Jperman
[per month.
Average number of men and boys employed per month 337\
W. Bracy &
Co.—gang-
way.
February.
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Total for the year
Reddy & Ri-j
ley—wagon-
work.
1,315
 
1,878 82
Reddy & Riley, per month $109 64
Win. Bracy & Co., per month 156 57
This firm employed their own laborers, and paid them out of the aver-
age of $156 57 per month.
May, 1870—Billman & Donaldson, 8f yards plane, 22^ yards skip=
$158 72. Nolan & Schultz, 18 yards gangway, 5 yards plane=$194 25. W.
Bracy & Co., 28f yards gangway=$273 36.
June, 1870—James Brady & Co., 4§ gangway, 72| airway=$345 00.
Nolan & Schultz, 33§ yards gangway=$232 56. Burns & M'Coy, 25gang-
way=$64 03. Amount paid workmen unknown.
July, 1870—Billman & Donaldson, 225 wagons=$224 00. Burns & M'-
Coy, 20 yards gangway, 6 yards airway, 5 yards pillar=$126 00. D. &
Billman, 15^ yards gangway=$114 00.
August, 1870—M'Gonigal & Co., 224 wagons=$269 66. Nolan, Schultz
& Co., 112 yards gangway=$188 52. Burns & M'Coy, 29| gangway=
$91 03.
September, 1870—Billman & Donaldson, 102 wagons=$84 59. Nolan
<pb>
& Schultz, 15^ yards gangway=$62 47. Burns & M'Coy, 14| yards gang-
way=54 66.
October, 1870—Nolan & Schultz, 11^ yards airway, 66-^ yards gangway
=$366 97. Amount paid laborers unknown. Burns & M'Coy, 41 yards
gangway=$140 54. B. M'Nelins, 48 yards gangway=$206 25. O'Neil &
M'Nulty, 187 wagons=$195 81. Donaldson & Billman, 483 wagons=
$434 36. Amount paid laborers unknown.
November, 1870—Nolan & Schultz, 85^-yards gangway=$144 61. Bill-
man & Donaldson, 526^ wagons=$420 25. Amount paid labors unknown.
J. Carr & Co., 466| wagons=$381 15. Laborers' pay unknown. Murray
& Scanlon, 258 wagons=$l92 54.
December, 1870—Nolan & Schultz, 85 yards gangway=$360 01. La-
borers' pay unknown. Murray and Scanlon, 273 wagons=$215 44. Bill-
man & Donaldson, 364 wagons=$283 62.
. The above is what each firm made during the month in which their names
are placed. Then to get what each man would make, we must divide the
firm earnings by the number of partners—some firms have as many as six
partners, and some only three, and even less.
Tide rates on coal transported over Lehigh Valley railroad from Mauch
Chunk to Easton, forty-six miles.
 
Month in which
change took place
March.
December
April
December
February
April
September
November
December
April
July
December
April
May
July
November j 2.00
December 2.20
April 2.00
June 2.20
October 2.41
November 2.66
April 4 2.20
April 18 1 2.66
July 11 3.05
August 3.37
April 2.45
B"0
: o
: q
2.02
2.02
1.78
1.23
1.78
1.38
1.38
1.43
1.37
1.43
1.30
1.39
1.46
1.10
1.45
1.82
0
93
93
82
50.6
82
03.44
63.44
66
63
65.6
60
64
67
50.8
66.9
83.6
92
101.2
92
101.2
111
122.50
101.2
122.50
140.50
155
113
Year.
1S65.,
1890.
1S07.
1868.,
Month in which
change took place.
1869..
1870.,
1871...
May
July
September...
October
March
April
March
April 13
August 17
October 1
November 1..
April 5
July 1
July 19
August 2
January 10
February 1
May 9
August 1
October 3
November 1...
December 1...
December 19..
January 2
February 16...
1"
i a
2.45
2.45
2.91
3.37
2.50
2.50
1.76
1.50
1.76
2.00
2.26
2.26
1.76
2.00
2.26
2.50
2.04
1.76
1.76
1.82
1.76
1.64
1.56
■1.64
1.82
4.00
<pb>
[copy.]
Stockton, Monday, June 20, 1870.
Mr. William Carr:
Dear Sir :—In order with the W. B. A., I write you the following:
There is sixteen men working here that is non-union men; five at No. 1,
four at No. 3, three at No. 5r and four at the stables.
At a meeting of the W. B. A. the following resolution was passed:
Resolved, If those men do not join our association between said date
and Saturday night, June 25, a suspension will take place on Monday,
June 27, 1870.
JOHN LLOYD, President.
THOS. JAMES, Secretary.
[copy.]
Stockton, June 2C, 1870.
NON-UNION MEN.
At No. 1.—James Hill, John Kein, James Hillhouse, Mike Sargent, Wil-
liam East.
At No. 3.—Samuel East, David Sevitchy, Henry Hebet, Rudolph Bur-
overgrath.
At No. 5.—Edward Lewis, John East.
At stables Peter Hollore, Nathan Beltz, John Bitcher, Geo. Cotzraan.
■
<pb>
<pb>
y
<pb>
<pb>
 
</div>
<pb>
