<div id="the devil's house" code="0" wordcount="12993">
P^
'
"& 4* 4*
ecreb
<pb>
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE
UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
~
<pb>
X
<pb>
I'
I
<pb>
<pb>
itt-tuir! r' ;;•-. .';:'.. •'•!»
j; fi >, " r. v
K F, • ,'» !.. ; .'•-.' \ ,v C '
<pb>
 IT
m:
<pb>
THE
SECRET OF FOUGEREUSE
3 Romance at tfje jFtftuntfj Centurg
FEOM THE FBENCH
BY
LOUISE IMOGEN GUINEY
Tout passe fors aymer Vieu. — OU) DEVICE
BOSTON"
MAELIEE, CALLANAN & CO.
1898
<pb>
COPYRIGHT, 1898,
BY MARLIER, CALLANAN & Co.
8. J. PARKHILL & CO., PRINT
226 FRANKLIN STREET
BOSTON
<pb>
TO
Q-EACE CLARKE DEN SLOW,
For Auld Lang Syne,
The translator's share in this book
is dedicated.
October 20, 1898.
<pb>
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
PAGE
THE DEVIL'S HOUSE 9
CHAPTER II.
DISGBACE 59
CHAPTER III.
THE PKISONEB 118
CHAPTER IV.
THE TBIBUSTAL 196
EPILOGUE 279
<pb>
CHAPTER I.
THE DEVIL'S HOUSE.
" A house: but under some prodigious ban
Of excommunication.
For over all there hung a cloud of fear:
A sense of mystery the spirit daunted,
And said, as plain as whisper in the ear,
The place is haunted !"
THOMAS HOOD, The Haunted House.
IN the reign of good King Rene", there stood
buried in the forest of Pouille", not far from An-
gers, a solitary hunting-lodge. Two graceful tur-
rets shot up from its huge low stretch of roof. The
windows, heavily barred, were yet a safe defence;
the massive oaken door was firm on its hinges; the
stone entrance-steps, sunken now in the ferns and
tall grass, were neither discolored nor broken; and
under the dark-glistening tapestry which ivy hung
upon the walls, there was hidden no gap in the
masonry. The whole place told of neglect, not
of ruin. Cobwebs at every casement, brushwood
9
<pb>
choking the walks, brambles covering the thresh-
old, were like so many voices, testifying that it
had been some time since" a human foot had en-
croached on the lawn, or a human eye tried to
pierce the mysteries of the abandoned dwelling.
The woodman's axe stopped short of those trees;
the fowler never dared pursue his game into the
coppices; and any homeless vagabond would rather
sleep in the open air on the stormiest night, than
seek shelter in so dreaded a spot. What was the
strange curse fallen on a habitation meant for
bright banquets and happy comradeship? What
was the secret charm which spread its thrilling
shadow over once hospitable halls? Curse and
charm summed themselves up in a word: the
house was haunted! A murder had been com-
mitted there : a dark, impenetrable, crime whose
victim had received no Christian burial, and whose
authors had eluded royal justice. The popular
imagination, seized with superstitious terror, had
formulated a report which daunted the living from
invading the ghostly precincts; the house, men
said, was haunted, and at the sight of it the bold-
est among them fled away. As to Sir Bertrand de
Pouille, he chose rather to give up his hunting-
ground than to remain the owner of the Devil's
property. But no one would buy it, no one would
take it as a gift: for the house was haunted.
One single person stood out against this general
sentiment, and looked upon the hawkers of the
legend as mere chicken-hearted cowards. This
<pb>
was Martin Bodin, landlord of the Red Rose tav-
ern, which was set at the edge of the woods, on the
road to Angers. To hear him talk, by daylight,
one would think Martin a gallant sceptic. He
grew a little more anxious by even-time, and would
mumble Paternosters, and glance steathily up and
down the road; but if any meddler began to talk
about the haunted house, the innkeeper flew into
a rage. With a partner and kinsman of his, Jacob
Piteux, he would come often to threats and even
blows, to avenge this offence against good manners.
And for a perfectly simple reason. One turret of
the lodge rose in plain view of the tavern windows;
and, amid great fantastic boughs, it seemed a sort
of challenge to the curious stranger, a lure to the
bolder spirits, and a menace to the weak. Nobody
could ignore it. Those who rushed to court adven-
ture returned limp and beaten from the hands of
some demon backed by Beelzebub, and the others
fell into a brown study and departed: two results
which broke the innkeeper's heart.
" If only they saw not that from their windows ! "
said he to his cousin Jacob; " I should care no whit
were pandemonium let loose. But no ! that has to
be the very first thing to take my guests' eye.
' Oh! what turret is that, Master Bodin ? Whose
fine estate is that ?' And thereupon you cannot
contain yourself, but must needs tell them its his-
tory, with embellishments all your own! "
" Only because I am fain they shall not learn it
from others, cousin Martin."
<pb>
" All, confound them! I would that the villains
who killed the old fellow had killed him somewhere
else, " sighed Bodin. " For five years long, not a
single traveller has passed more than three nights
-at the Red Rose. And if this sort of thing goes
on, I shall take up my ancient trade of soldiering,
and leave you to run to ruin alone."
" Tut, tut, mate! You know well, do you not,
that in these parts a great coward is a yet greater
drinker ? Have a care of your cellar, my respected
relative, and then the guests will leave their ter-
rors at the bottom of the cask. Of course if you
are bound to go " —
" You would be in too great luck, Jacob the
Weasel. I shall cling to my duty, to my hostelry.
If only they saw not that from their windows!"
One day, soon after, it was noised abroad that
the Devil's House had found a purchaser. Had
this purchaser been an aged, cracked, miserly per-
sonage, he would have been set down for a sorcerer.
But what could be said against the baron Guy de
Fougereuse, a gallant knight in the glory of his
youth, the favorite of King Rene, and the idol of
the people for his noble bearing, his good humor,
and his liberal almsgivings ? Gossip contented
itself with murmuring resignedly, " God help the
gentle lord!" Nor did the courtiers fail to rally
Fougereuse for his latest whim; but he was wont
to act for himself, and to pay little heed to outside
opinion; and what would seem odd in another
seemed in him so much a matter of course that the
<pb>
incident was soon forgotten. Bodin, indeed, with
all his heart, invoked a blessing on the baron's
head, trusting that his very first move would be
to raze the lodge, with its accursed turret, to the
ground. However, he did nothing of the kind.
The old house lived on, in as bad repute as ever,
and the new owner appeared not to concern him-
self about it.
Upon a certain November night, Master Martin
came into the great room of the tavern with a very
uneasy air. He went about trying the shutters,
and carefully examining the bolts of the main door,
sliding them to and fro in their staples; then he
shut and locked every exit, with a great clinking
of iron, and much creaking and banging. He
opened a large oaken chest, and began to explore
minutely its compartments and corners. The two
waiters of the inn stared at their master open-
mouthed ; Jacob, winking those small sly eyes
of his, touched his glass to that of a soldier at
table whom he knew, and kept up the song he had
already begun: —
" A health to Father Noah,
Pass around!
He planted first the vine
In the ground.
And to better keep afloat,
Be built himself a boat,
For his own, own, own,
For Ms ben, ben, ben,
For his own, for his hen, for Ids own benefit,
When the rain rained a bit! "
<pb>
"What are you laying out for us, cousin?" he
cried, interrupting himself. "All Souls' Day is
over and gone."
Without replying, Martin drew forth from an
oblong box a taper blessed at Candlemas, such as
every Christian household then made it a point
of honor to treasure up; and lighting it, he set it
before an image of Saint Martin, which was nailed
against the shutter. A great fire was crackling
on the hearth; two torches, fastened to the wall
by iron clamps, threw out their ruddy blaze. The
little pale, wavering ray of the candle, seen against
the warm glow of fantastic light, made its own im-
pression upon the frequenters of the Red Rose.
"How now, good Master Bodin ! " questioned a
young nobleman, who was stretched at ease in the
leathern armchair of the host; " are we to have
High Mass?"
" Master dear," whispered the two waiters, shak-
ing from head to foot, "let us set it to burn in the
back kitchen. It freezes one's blood to see it
here."
"Surely," said in his deep accents a lusty
equerry, who was busy draining a full cup of An-
gevin wine, "surely you have odd notions, com-
rade ! Is this the illumination befitting a jolly
company ? Oh, fie ! "
"Tease no more, Vincent. And, cousin Jacob,
sew up your tongue. Pardon me, Messire de
Maulny; but it is just five years, day for day,
since the thing happened over there. One cannot
<pb>
be too cautious. Pray allow the candle to remain
here."
"It is a small matter to me whether it be here
or anywhere else. But I reserve the right to be
amazed at such a sudden devotional attitude on the
part of a person hitherto supposed to fear neither
God nor Devil."
"As my lord of Maulny ought to recall," put
in the equerry Vincent, " it is much more usual to
lose the fear of God first."
"Have our Martin and the Old Harry had a
scrimmage,then?" laughed Walter de Maulny, in
the light, mocking tone habitual to him. " I
should have believed more readily that the two
were sworn cronies."
"Then your wager had been lost, my lord!"
answered the sharp voice of Jacob Piteux. " They
have been' at swords' points ever since Satan
strangled our uncle Jasper without allowing him
time to make his will."
Walter raised himself on one elbow, his face
losing a little of its scornful indifference. " The
Devil really strangled your uncle Jasper, did he ?
How did it happen, Martin? "
"It is a fine yarn," muttered Vincent between
two bumpers.
"My friend, it is no yarn," said the innkeeper,
"but as true a truth as ever was. I love not to
tell it, nor to bring it back to mind on a day like
this. Jacob would have done better had he held
his peace."
<pb>
"I thought the adventure would interest my
lord of Maulny, cousin Martin. It is altogether
extraordinary. If I was wrong, I beg absolution
of the honorable assembly, and will speak no more
unless I am ordered."
" As for me, I do order you!" continued Maulny.
" The tale will nourish my sinking soul for a
quarter-hour."
"Indeed, I am your lordship's humble servant
to command; but I dare not fly in the face of my
cousin Martin, who is so proud of the fame of his
inn."
"And would you rather offend my lordship,
then ? Have a care, O clown ! But proceed, pro-
ceed."
" Shall I do so, cousin ? " asked Piteux meekly,
turning towards the proprietor of the tavern.
" Yea, ninny, since that gentleman requires it,"
replied Bodin testily. "But if ever again you
dabble in such topics at the Red Rose, you will
have had your final bite out of my larder! "
"Then, by his lordship's order," and Jacob
bowed towards Maulny. " It is but a sorry thing
to offer those ears which are accustomed to the
noble entertaining of the troubadours; yet we poor
nobodies can give only what we have. You have
possibly heard, my lord, of Wolfram, the old phy-
sician who lived in the hunting-lodge belonging to
the sire de Pouille?"
"Wolfram the Owl-? I had clean forgotten
him: an unlovely person, whom Bertrand de
<pb>
Pouill6 brought from Lorraine, without letting us
know where he stumbled across the wonder. A
bit of a Jew, they said, or a witch. What became
of him ? "
" He had a tragic fate," said Jacob, lowering his
voice. " Wolf was a strange being. He lived
alone in his tower like a fox in his hole, asleep by
day, awake by night, eating next to nothing, and
always aware of the vision no one else could see.
Among us he passed for a vampire. It was believed
that he had led seven or eight lives in as many
different bodies."
Cried Walter: "Too many by half! But these
Germans are so immoderate."
" Well, when a man sells his soul to the Devil,
the latter is most liberal in his pay, my lord.
Some folk declared they had spied Wolf, changed
into his namesake, crossing the thickets, by the
waning moon. And Martin here, one fine evening,
counted six and thirty weasels holding one another
by the tail, and wailing, calling on Wolfram's
name."
" Are you raving, boldest of liars ?" the inn-
keeper broke in. " Never in my life did I see
such a sight!"
" Peace, peace, cousin. (I would not contradict
you in so small a matter.) However it be, my
lord, the doctor delved for secrets no Christian
man could teach him. Time after time we used
to watch the bright lamp begin to gleam in the
high turret window, which would burn on till the
<pb>
dawn; and we used to say to one another, ' Wolf
is at work with Satan!' We did not know then
how truly we spoke. One November evening —
it is exactly five years ago to-night — no light
appeared. On the morrow, Farmer Huche went
to rap at the door of the little house, to get some
remedy or other for the • quartan ague: for the
sorcerer could cure diseases better than any one.
There was no answer to his knock. Huche re-
solved to climb the turret stair. And once there,
what should he behold but Master Wolfram
stretched before him: dead, beyond the shadow
of a doubt! His eyes were wide open; there was
a flush on his cheeks; his garments were singed;
and a strong smell of sulphur gave witness that
the Evil One had passed that way. All about the
body fragments of vases, retorts, alembics, black-
ened manuscripts, strewed the floor. The alarm
was given, a judge was called in, and the inquest
began. The seneschal, Messire de Beauvau, was
determined to find manifold evidence of murder,
and he came near hanging some innocent men.
But the Devil's claw was plain in that death, so
that they gave up trying to fathom it. All the
same, the priest at Ponts-de-Ce wished to give
old Wolf Christian burial, as he had been to con-
fession not long before. But the people got wind
of it, and there was a clatter: a regular riot, so
to speak. The grand provost sent the constable
around, by night, to my uncle Jasper, who was
a gravedigger by trade, ordering him to bury the
<pb>
German doctor in the forest. I was there myself.
When we lowered the coffin into the ditch, it
seemed to me as if the body stirred within. No
prayer and no benediction were given the de-
parted, which was a pity, because unbaptized earth
cannot keep the dead. Wolf did not sleep in
peace. He rose many a time from his grave, to
go back to his scrolls, and handle his alembics
again. Neighbors saw him flying over the tree-
tops, all aflame, or crossing the Loire, draped in
his shroud, and gliding barefooted over the water,
without leaving a ripple on the surface. And a
storm of complaints and reproaches showered on
the gravedigger, for no fault of his at all. ' You
did not half bury him !' they cried. ' You do not
know your business! All the souls in Purgatory
will soon be wandering up and down the roads, if
they keep you in office!' So the good man got
somewhat angry at last, and swore he would plant
a cross over Wolfram's grave, to force him to lie
quiet. Martin and I then accompanied him to the
edge of the wood. He. plunged into the bushes,
singing the penitential psalm, Languentibus, to
appease the doctor's spirit. But when he reached
the grave, lo! it was open and empty. Peels of
laughter filled all the air about. Now, on looking
up, he noticed the turret window was agleam, and
he rushed thither. The door was ajar; he climbed
the stair, and entered the laboratory. There was
Wolf, in a scarlet gown, his white hair in a sort
of bluish smoke from hell, and his eyes like fiery
<pb>
coals. Two scapegrace imps were blowing the
flames in the kiln; a tall demon was mixing a
potion, another held a phial; and Wolfram, in the
middle of all this, stood issuing commands. Any
other man except my uncle would have fled. His
avocation had toughened him a good deal against
the supernatural. 'Hail, Master Wolf!' said he.
'Would it be an offence to inquire whether I
address the living or the dead?' The other never
looked at him at all; but kept turning over the
leaves of a manuscript, and repeating, ' I cannot
find it! I shall never find it!' —' You old miscre-
ant !' continued my uncle, ' do you know that I
am in danger of losing my place, all on your
account? They say I did not bury you properly.
Tell me how it is.' Wolfman never heard him.
Throwing down his manuscript, he cried, fetching
a deep sigh, 'I cannot find it! I shall never find
it!' At that very moment a smiling, sinister figure
appeared at the doctor's elbow, offering him, with
one hand, a parchment lettered in strange charac-
ters, and with the other, a pen dipped in some red
fluid. Wolf uttered a cry of joy, and snatched
greedily at the precious script; but the sneering
demon shot away from him, uplifting himself in
air, and floating there, with a horrible laugh.
Wolfram used every effort to obtain the magic
parchment; and at last, worn-out and panting, he
exclaimed:'Thou hast conquered, Satan! Give
me knowledge, and I give myself to thee.' The
smile of the diabolic spirit was enough to freeze
<pb>
one's blood, as he passed to the doctor the bloody
pen. ' Sign the contract,' so he spoke, iu a voice
which had not a human tone in it: 'sign, and
knowledge shall be yours!' Wolfram seized the
pen, and traced his name. My uncle Jasper could
hold in no longer. ' Whelp of Germany!' he
shouted, ' go damn thyself somewhere else than
iu our village!' And throwing himself between
the Devil and the doctor, he tore the document
from them. A throng of hideous demons surged
about him with angry shrieks and imprecations,
and over all arose this lamentation of Wolf, ' I
burn, O my friend the gravedigger, I burn! Why
did you not have my grave blessed ?' My uncle
tried to make the sign of the Cross, and to say
Vade retro. But an iron hand was at his throat,
and he knew his houi' had come. Overcome by
the diabolic creatures, he fainted away, and fell
half dead to the floor. Well, there we found him,
the next morning, stretched out, quite unconscious,
on the planking of the turret chamber. When we
threw a bucketful of water over him, he opened his
eyes. Then for three days he had the fever, and
shook with it till he died. He received the Last
Sacraments very devoutly. Nobody had time to
think of sending up the notary. It is a terrible
foolish business for men to neglect making their
wills while they are alive and well! If my uncle
Jasper had but taken due precaution, Martin and
I would be this day among the richest burghers of
Angers."
<pb>
" A pretty figure you would cut! " cried Walter.
"Over and above all this, Master Jacob, whence
did you get the details of the story? From
your uncle? From Wolfram? Or from the
Devil?"
" From my uncle, my lord; from my worthy
uncle, God rest his soul! He told me the whole
thing during those last nights when I sat up with
him; and pitiful it wasito hear."
"He was delirious, in short," said Martin.
" The truth is, he died of a good old-fashioned
pleurisy, and his grandnephew Roger inherited
the entire fortune, which the old fellow had saved
penny by penny. Jacob and I never saw a red
cent of it."
" If he had pleurisy, brother Martin," remarked
Vincent, "it would appear that the aforesaid buck-
etful of fresh water was clearly intended to restore
the health of your money-bagged uncle! "
" A good hit, Master Govier ! Irony has come
to you with years ! " laughed Walter, bringing up
his hand in a satirical salute to the honest Vin-
cent. " Whether true or false, Jacob, it is a well-
invented tale. I notice that the tramps and other
gentry who scour the woods are very careful to
nourish this sense of popular terror: it secures
them from interference. Come, now, are you not
a little more partial to them than is reasonable ?
You may own it to me, you know, quite safely."
" My lord," protested Piteux, drawing himself
up to his lank height, and lending to his yellow,
<pb>
crafty person as much offended dignity as his
sorry figure could bear, " my lord, your sojourn in
Sicily must have familiarized you with brigands,
or you could not talk like that."
" Though one brigand is as good as another,"
answered Walter, with a sarcastic, habitual shrug
of the shoulders. " Do you think you can per-
suade me that your tale is true ? If you do, per
Bacco ! you lack not enterprise."
" Mayhap your lordship disbelieves in the
Devil?" Jacob put both elbows on the table, and
looked across at Maulny. " There are those who
consider him a more useful patron than the saints! "
" One would say you have put him to the test.
But his client is small credit to him. Ah, well,
enough of heathenish chatter, my prudent Jacob.
You and I know each other by heart; and my six
years of absence have not made me forget. Tell
me, does Wolfram's ghost still pursue its nocturnal
travels ? "
" No, indeed, sir; not that I know of. Since
the accursed house changed owners, the old sor-
cerer has been seen no more. My lord of Pouille"
was his friend and his dupe. But this one is able
to hold his own against him and keep him quiet,
whether he will or no."
Walter's eyes were eagerly questioning Piteux.
" He is a wealthy and powerful nobleman," Ja-
cob went on; "Vincent will give you his name."
Vincent made a gesture of vexed refusal; but
controlling himself, he rose, crossing his arms.
<pb>
" Why not name him yourself, Jacob Piteux ?
My master, the baron de Fougereuse, makes no
secret of his transaction with the lord of Pouille.
These lands are now ours; we hunt here every
week."
The name of Fougereuse gave Walter de Maulny
a thrill; he turned his head quickly. " Is that
so, Vincent Govier? Has my dear cousin Guy
become the happy ruler of the Devil's House ? I
knew he had courage, but I hardly expected so
much of him. To have the Old Harry for vassal
and tenant would scarcely delight me."
Vincent shrugged his shoulders with an air of
superior disdain. "Can it b3, my lord, that you
lend any credit to old women's tales, bred in the
brain of that white-livered Jacob? A man has a
fine chance to lie, who talks of things that nobody
can dispute from personal knowledge! The fact
is that the house is haunted neither by the wretched
alchemist himself, nor by the Devil. All that is
the merest trash, concocted by idiots."
" Would to God it were ! " murmured Martin.
"But, friend Vincent," Jacob sweetly expostu-
lated, " you would not deny that Wolfram died
there, or that my uncle Jasper" —
" Plague take your uncle Jasper! He was the
biggest liar and boaster on the earth; worthily
did he claim relationship with you."
"Hold, Master Vincent!" cried Bodin. "Re-
member that Jacob and I are of the same blood.
Respect our family; else you" and I will have it.
<pb>
out between us, some fine morning. By the bull's
horn, I have not forgotten how to fight! "
" Simpleton I" growled Vincent for his sole
reply. And he turned his back on the inn-
keeper.
Martin was only too anxious to further the
quarrel, so glad was lie of the opportunity to talk
of something other than the dangerous proximity
of Satan, and to vent upon any one his long-accu-
mulating wrath. Walter de Maulny, both elbows
on the arms of his chair, regarded the two cham-
pions with such a smile as might be worn by a
bored spectator \vho begins to take interest in the
play. Jacob drew in closer to the high chimney-
piece, and crouched there like a hunted quarry.
At this moment re-entered the two waiters, carry-
ing jugs filled with wine. Shaking and bewildered,
clinging close together, they rolled unsteadily into
the middle of the room, and stopped there, trans-
fixed with fright, babbling words of no meaning
or sequence.
" On my word! " said Walter, as coolly as ever;
" what has come over the rascals ? To see their
wan noses, one would suppose they had encoun-
tered old Wolf's ghost."
" Boobies, -what have you done?" cried the inn-
keeper, taking the swishing jugs from their hand.
" I vow, you have let my best wine run to waste,
as you did the other day. If I catch you in the
act" —
One of the servants made a negative sign ; the
<pb>
other, somewhat less terrified, managed to articu-
late a few words.
" Master, master ! It is ... it is ... the
Thing! Woe is me ! "
"What? " roared the landlord, "what thing?"
" O master! It is shining again ! "
" Shining, ye bibbers ? "
" Yes, master. The light . . . the light over
there . . . high up in the turret. You know."
"How now!" laughed Maulny. "This is get-
ting to be quite absorbing."
"'My lord, the report is simply incredible," said
Martin, not without agitation. "The blockheads
are full of wine, and crazed with fear."
" Open the window, comrade ! It will settle our
minds." Thus spoke Vincent.
Bodin hesitated ; but at an imperative sign from
Maulny he pushed back, sighing regretfully, the
heavy wooden shutters. Nor could he help mur-
muring once more to himself: "If only they could
not see that from here ! "
The waiters had told the truth. Across the
sombre mass of oak and chestnut boughs rose the
slender contour of the eastern turret. A light
burned at the narrow, grated opening which was
called the window of Master Wolfram. The gust
of wind which swayed the tree-tops set creaking
the ancient weathercock of the inn, and rattled on
its iron rod the sign of the Red Hose. Clouds
were heaped about the moon, whose pale, sad face,
obscured every now and then, reappeared abruptly,
<pb>
and newly vanished. But nothing darkened or
disturbed the mysterious ray which sparkled on in
the dark, like a star forgotten between earth and
heaven. There it was, inexplicable; and Bodin
and his guests were mute for a moment, while the
waiters, kneeling close to the blessed candle, mum-
bled their awe-stricken prayers,.
" God help us all! " Jacob murmured in the ac-
cents of contrition. " Will you consider me a
chicken-hearted idiot after this, Vincent Govier?
Will you call my accurate testimony old women's
tales? Behold the lamp of old Wolf, re-lit.
Whether he be man or demon, the eastern turret
has at least one occupant to-night."
" Some tramp or some madman," scornfully an-
swered the equerry. "I wonder what has come
over the gamekeeper!"
Jacob obstinately resumed. " There is nothing
human about that light. It burned just so the
evening of the murder, the same day, the same
hour, as this. Do you remember, cousin Martin ?
We were seated near the casement when those
pitiful groans " —•
" Go hang, with your pitiful groans ! " cried the
master of the house. " Never did I hear any in
this place but your own. Did I, I, bear part in
Wolf's murder? Does his shade parade the corri-
dors of my inn? I defy any man, whosoever he
be, to say that this is not an honest Christian dwell-
ing, with blessed candles in it, where travellers
sleep sound. It is nothing to me if the demons
<pb>
are holding carnival in the depth of the woods.
Thank God, there is peace at the Red Rose."
"Landlord," said Maulny, who up to now had
been scanning in silence the mysterious glare,
"landlord, do not play the braggart. You are
shaking in your skin, like the servants. And, in-
deed, it is an odd incident. Are you perfectly sure
that for five years there has been no glimmer from
that accursed house ? "
<* As sure as that I am alive, my lord! I never
went to bed without looking at it from this side;
because, unluckily, you can always see it from
the windows."
" Yes, the turret is plain enough, Martin, but
the foliage conceals the lodge ; and if men, or
ghosts either, had chosen to light up the lower hall
every evening of the five years, who would have
been the wiser ?"
" In that case, Messire Walter," replied Vincent,
" the neighborhood would not have lacked eyes to
see, and tongues to tattle. But the feat is quite
impossible, for mortals at least, thanks to the solid
bars which defend the casement, and the stout
locks which my master, the baron, has provided for
the doors."
" I recognize the admirable prudence of my
cousin," said Walter, withdrawing from the win-
dow. "If, then, we agree that it is the Evil One,
that does not look well for your master, does it,
Vincent?"
"What are you saying, my lord of Maulny?
<pb>
Do you mean to hint that the baron de Fouge-
reuse " —
"I mean nothing, my friend. The Lord pre-
serve me from casting suspicion on a kinsman,
whose honor is so close to mine! But I did say,
and I repeat it, that I am not pleased to see this
sort of thing at his house. Guy has enemies at
court; and a misstep on his part might have grave
consequences for a King's favorite, even if that
King be the trusting, easy-going Rene of Anjou! "
" If the King's favorite were Walter de Maulny
instead of Guy de Fougereu.se, I could then name
various missteps which might have grave conse-
quences ! "
" Impudent varlet! " cried Maulny hotly, touch-
ing the hilt of his poniard. " Were you a noble,
my sword would have made you pay already for
that speech. But one deals out justice to your
sort with a stick. I am foolish to lose my temper
over a creature who does not belong to me, and
whose master I would fain not offend."
" Your sword could never be dishonored by con-
tact with mine, sir knight! Rude though it be,
it has met upon the battlefield more than one
blade as proud as yours. But I must not vex my
master. You are his kinsman; therefore let us
have a truce. What were you aiming at, in ex-
pressing your displeasure at the fact that the
Devil's House and his window are now in the
power of the baron de Fougereuse ?"
" What was I aiming at ? " echoed Walter, turn-
<pb>
ing around in the chair where he had reseated
himself. "Do you not perceive, my threefold
idiot, that if the mystery of this evening- be not
solved, all Angers by to-morrow will be crying
magic and witchcraft, calling for exorcism, piling
up fagots, and burning down that reprobate house,
— the house your master bought, and was so care-
ful to furnish with big locks ? They will say that
there are ghosts in it, and hidden treasures ; they
will say that my cousin Guy deals with the former
in order to secure the latter. Perhaps it is noth-
ing to you, to have them speak so of your master;
but Guy is my cousin, and ... in short, Vincent
Govier, it goes against me to have such things con-
nected with him. Understand if you can! "
" I understand you, sir," said the equerry in a
laconic tone, rising up. " Our acquaintanceship
does not date from an hour ago. When you were
a child at the manor of Fougereuse, I taught you
to throw the lance and to run at tilt. Your heart
and character have not changed, nor mine either.
I forewarn you. Now, as then, you will find me
standing between my young master and his ene-
mies. ' A word to the wise is enough!'"
" Vincent, what are you doing?" Bodin spoke
in astonishment, seeing the equerry buckle on his
sword, wrap himself in his cloak, and draw down
the hood over his forehead. " What are you do-
ing, friend? Hey! . . . you would start out? At
this hour? In the middle of the night? Do you
want to be bewitched? Whither would you go ? "
<pb>
"I am going to the Devil," replied Vincent;
"and I advise none of you to follow me. Good-
evening."
Jacob threw himself energetically against the
tavern door. " O cousin Martin, keep him in!
keep him in! He will meet uncle Jasper's fate;
and the baron will hold us responsible. Vincent,
my old friend, do not try to get strangled! "
Vincent, with one sweep of his arm, brushed the
meagre Jacob aside, and busied himself with the
bolts of the heavy door.
" Let me alone ! Do you not see how impatient
my lord Walter is growing ? I should have been
thither and back by this time."
" What ails you ? " said Maulny, turning his
head. " What right have you to mix up my name
with this sudden whim of yours? Did I ask any-
thing of you ? "
"You did not, sir; and that is why I must
hasten. I see your thoughts. Before an hour
passes you will know all."
As he spoke, the last bolt gave way under his
resolute fingers. The door creaked on its hinges,
opening wide, and letting in a gust of wind and
rain. Vincent Govier gathered his cloak about
him, and descended the first of the gray stone
steps.
" But, really, where would you go ?" cried
Martin, springing after him. "Can you commit
the folly of going . . . going . . . over there ? "
The equerry stopped an instant on the road, and
<pb>
t
faced about. " I commit that folly, good friend
Bodin, for I must reassure my lord of Maulny on
a point of family honor. Tell him that I shall
arrive -presently at the Devil's House, for the pur-
pose of inquiring of Satan whether by any chance
he is not slighting his pet, the lord of Maulny, in
giving his confidence to the baron de Fougereuse.
I shall return with his answer."
"If you never return?"
" In that case, I shall have died; and do you
notify my master. Good-night, good fellows!"
and the equerry swung down the road, at a great
pace, toward the haunted house, and was soon lost
in the darkness. Bodin re-entered, shaking his
head.
" I'll be hanged if I know his object! There
must be a fatality in that infernal light, to attract
a man to it at midnight, in the teeth of a storm.
Vincent is brave enough in his dealings with
other men, but I never would have believed him
so rash as to collar the Devil in person, and ask
him to give an account of himself."
" Govier was drinking to-night, was he not?"
asked Maulny superciliously. His blazing eyes
belied his affectation of calm.
" Not a fourth part of what he can take without
moving a hair, my lord. If he be drunk with any-
thing, it is with anger."
" Such a fool was never in a nobleman's service
before! But Guy de Fougereuse has the knack of
fascinating his retainers; they are tame greyhounds
<pb>
to him, and to other people snarling wolves. Vin-
cent's is a Ccise in point. . . . Do you think he
will come back, Bodin?"
" He promised he would, my lord; and I have
never known him to break his word."
" But," interrupted Jacob, " he may find yonder
some one to hinder him, cousin Martin. The best
soldier on earth has his moments of ill luck. If
the ghost of Wolf " —
"Stuff and nonsense, cousin Jacob! Tell that
to babes."
" Very well, then. If the Devil " —
"Vincent went to confession at All Saints'."
"If scoundrels, thieves, cutthroats" —
"There will be a lively dance, and little left of
them for the law to deal with. I assure you, Go-
vier could skewer a dozen without exerting him-
self at all, and two dozen by exerting himself just
a trifle. I wager that he will have returned within
three hours."
" Cousin Martin, replied Jacob, " I take up the
wager, because Vincent Govier will not return
to-night. What are the stakes? Will you risk
ten crowns ? "
Bodin protested, but Jacob constrained him.
The bet was agreed upon, and the ten crowns were
placed upon the table for the winner. The two
established themselves there with a pint of wine
between them, meaning to beguile the weariness
of waiting by sipping the nectar of the Red
Rose. Meanwhile, in apparent indifference to the
<pb>
talk being exchanged, Walter de Maulny, his
eyes fixed on the fitful hearth-fire, sank into a
revery.
Though he was barely thirty, he might have
been ten years older. He looked prematurely
aged, with his melancholy face, his sated air, his
listless attitude. Analyzing this man, one felt
that his youth was long ago over and done, and
past reclaiming. Generous illusions, the heart hot
for action, chivalrous ideals, were not for him; and
he could barely remember that he had ever known
them. His eyes, flashing with sombre fires, indi-
cated, nevertheless, an ardent, obstinate, passion-
ate nature. The close, finely chiselled lips denoted
energy and will, and the low but intelligent
forehead seemed f6rmed for philosophic thought.
Above all, a certain innate elegance characterized
his whole person and his every motion, and be-
spoke noble breeding. How was it that such
brilliant gifts had so poorly served their possessor ?
or that, after having dazzled the court of Anjou,
and basked in the royal favor, Walter de Maulny
should be now a cheated dreamer, tired of life, and
forsaken by fortune? He seemed to read his own
history in the fantastic volumes of flame and
smoke before him. He dwelt upon his childhood,
passed at the castle of Fougereuse with his cousin
Guy and little Jsabelle; of his first riding-lessons;
his first attempts to wield arms; his first hunt
through the woodland; the instructions of the mas-
ter equerry; and the instructions of the chaplain.
<pb>
He thought of all that manly and soldierly train-
ing which his youth had received under the eye
of the austere Baron Amaury, and of all his in-
tellectual labors encouraged by his godmother,
Yvette, the mother of Guy and Isabelle. And
as he thought, he frowned, and his eyebrows
puckered. Like a far echo, he seemed to hear
the voice of Vincent Govier, and that of the ven-
erable chaplain of Fougereuse, repeating together
a word which was a challenge: " Master Walter,
you do well indeed, yet your cousin Guy does
better than you." Another picture came up be-
fore him. King Rene's court, gracious, animated,
attractive; the paradise of troubadours, the father-
land of artists; the King, himself an artist and a
troubadour, open and sweet of nature, and busied
rather with the enriching of his lovely city than
with the defence of his duchy against the greed
of Louis XI.
For a brief while, Walter had played a leading
part on that brilliant stage. A friend to poetry
and the arts, a skilful diplomat, an exquisite
courtier, he knew how to please the credulous Rene,
how to enter into intimate relations with him,
and secure his good-will. Maulny's counsel was
acceptable, and his policy was able to checkmate
that of the King of France. Fortune smiled
upon him; but one day (as if to show upon how
slight a thread hangs the friendship of the great!),
one inauspicious day, the favorite awoke to find
that he had no influence, the dictator was without
<pb>
power; the ready adviser had no advice to give.
Rene ' of Anjou turned suddenly against his loyal
minion of the evening before, and reproached him
with having served two masters, Louis XI. and
Rene" I. And to whom did the old King pledge his
wounded faith? To a young knight newly ar-
rived at court: to the baron Guy de Fougereuse.
This time Walter's hand clinched itself angrily
over his sword-hilt, while Vincent's parting words
came back to him: " I shall inquire of Satan
whether he is not slighting his pet, the lord of
Maulny, by giving his confidence to the baron
de Fougereuse!" And he added, in his own
mind: "If I were indeed the object of Satan's
partiality, Guy would be there to supplant me ! "
Nor was this all. Walter recalled his six years'
sojourn in Sicily. Deep in a certain conspiracy,
and one of its leading spirits, preparing to seize
the government, and overthrow public order, the
lord of Maulny was hiding at Palermo, in dis-
guise, and passing under a borrowed name. But
one day, in the street, a gentleman came upon
him with a " Good-morrow, cousin Walter! " be-
wildered him with a vehement embrace, carried
him off, by main force, to sup with ten or a dozen
Angevin knights, old playfellows of Walter's,
questioned him closely, and tendered him many
offers of service. The next day, thanks to this
excellent relative, all Palermo knew of Maulny's
presence, and the plot was discovered. The zeal-
ous friend was, of course, Guy de Fougereuse
<pb>
Walter, entreated by him to leave Italy and re-
turn to Anjou, and being pardoned by the good
King Rene ' at the request of his favorite, con-
sented, in the hope of retrieving his fortune and
starting upon a new career. But it was ordained
that everything should go against him. When
he came back to Maulny, he found his affairs in
a very bad state; his debts unpaid; his estate,
mortgaged before his departure, on the point of
being sold: ruin, in short, at his doors. A splen-
did inheritance, on which his last hope was staked,
fell to a happier rival: that is to say, again and
always, to his cousin, the baron de Fougereuse.
It was maddening! For a moment, 'it seemed to
Walter as if all the powers of darkness had taken
possession of the great room of the inn, and were
dancing a crazy saraband around him, shouting
the name of Guy de Fougereuse.
"Who defeated you in such and such a joust
or tourney? — Guy de Fougereuse."
" Who captured from you the affections of the
King? — Guy de Fougereuse."
" Who blocked your way in Italy, and made
your projects come to nothing ? — Guy de Fouge-
reuse."
" Who secured the inheritance which was yours
by right? — Guy de Fougereuse."
" Who now accords to you a sort of scornful
protection, and spares you neither advice nor re-
proof ? — Guy de Fougereuse."
" He has taken my sunshine from me," thought
<pb>
Walter, "and he owes me some reparation. What
is there about that fopling courtier that he should
succeed so, when all my efforts fail ? Is he hand-
some? I was handsomer than he. Intelligent?
Not so intelligent as I. Brave? We were both
that. A clever politician? One far inferior to
me. His birth was not nobler than mine; his for-
tune was ordinary. He is not diligent; he has an
air of jesting and unconcern. Yet I waste myself
in labor and speculation, I use up my energy, I
fight with the strength of despair, and it is he
who wins ! Everybody seems to be under an obli-
gation to him because he took the trouble to be
born. Everything smiles upon him, and makes his
life a holiday. Fickle fortune is constant enough
to him. For six years past, his standing has been
unassailable. What special talisman has Heaven
given to him? "
" He is happy! " a tempting voice seemed to
murmur at his ear. " And happy you will never
be."
" We shall see!" Walter hissed between his
clenched teeth. " I am not a player who throws
away the dice because he loses at the first few
throws. This is the very hour for a sweeping re-
taliation. Guy has taken my all from me; Guy
shall now restore it. Choose, haughty Fougereuse!
Take me for brother, or take me for deadly foe:
give me the hand of Isabelle and her dowry, in
restitution for a confiscated heritage, or let us have
war to the knife. I will drag you from your high
<pb>
places, and make your disgrace serve me as mine
served you: as a stepping-stone to further, ad-
vancement. If Heaven refuse to watch over me,
at least hell will help me on. Lucifer! I can
say to you what Wolfram said: ' I cede myself to
you, in exchange for my own victory, and the ruin
of Guy de Fougereuse !' "
Even as Walter de Maulny conceived this im-
pious defiance to the future and to the Most High,
he caught the glance, sharp and saturnine, of Jacob
Piteux's eye. It seemed to answer him like a
voice: "We play the same game, my lord." A
rap at the door woke him from his musing, and
brought the two startled drinkers to their feet.
" Vincent! " they cried together.
" Or the Devil rather," Jacob added; " since our
poor Vincent" —
A second knock, more vigorous than the other,
shook the tavern walls, and an imperious voice,
half drowned in a squall of wind, shouted forth, —
"Are you ever going to open, landlord? Bad
luck to you ! "
"H'm !" murmured Walter. "This is a demon
of some social importance."
Bodin, not anxious to see the whole structure
tumble about his ears, did not wait for a third
summons. The door, which he cautiously set ajar,
was shoved vehemently from without, and the
newcomer, dripping with rain, and wrapped in a
huge cloak which concealed his face, stood before
them.
<pb>
"See to my horse, innkeeper. Let him have
plenty of oats. The poor beast is exhausted."
Then, without a greeting to any one, he went
over to the chimneypiece, and took a comfortable
posture in an easy-chair, facing Walter de Maulny.
From beneath his cloak he drew an oddly shaped
cage, where wild creatures were moving about con-
fusedly.
" There now, my beauties, warm yourselves ! "
he said, placing the cage on the hearthstone. " The
journey was a hard one, but here we are at home.
Show your pretty selves a little to the gentleman,
my darlings ! " And teasing his feathered prison-
ers with the tip of his switch, he won in answer
a frightened beating of wings and some hoarse
croaks.
Bodin, who had thought to see Vincent enter,
stared at the stranger with open mouth. Jacob
muttered, " I told you so. It is the Devil! "
Walter, half smiling, seemed amused at the scene,
though not surprised.
" Wake up, innkeeper! Has your cellar run
dry?" continued the unknown, "or what has
come over your larder? Do you think that a
gentleman rides hither in a storm, past midnight,
for the mere privilege of gazing upon the chimney-
piece of your establishment ? "
"But . . . but" . . . stammered Bodin, "who
are you, sir ? "
" What now ? Who am I, clown ? " cried the
stranger with mock fury. " Does that concern
<pb>
you? My name is too patrician for your long
ears. Bring me something for supper, and bring
it quickly."
" I will, Messire Lo'ic," replied the innkeeper,
who had just recognized the voice of his guest.
•" I do not know what got into me, that I should
make such a mistake !"
Messire Lo'ic burst out laughing. Presently
he cast aside his cloak, drenched in rain, and ap-
peared before the others as a young page of a
graceful figure.
" Well, well! " said Walter; " I believe it is little
Kernis ! . . . grown a bit, to be sure, and with a
larger stock of impudence. Are you not in singu-
lar company, my boy ? "
"Jacob, why are you prowling about that cage ? "
exclaimed Lo'ic, without paying the slightest at-
tention to Walter's presence. "Those innocents
are under my care, and I have to answer for them
to the keeper of the king's aviary. Do not plague
them! They object to your Jewish aspect."
" Jewish! Oh, sir," mumbled Jacob indignantly,
"you know that is not true."
" I know nothing of the sort, nor do these
' ladies. Ask them. Do you take him for a Chris-
tian, my loves ? "
" By my soul! " cried Walter in disgust; " how
can you be smitten with the charms of such out-
rageous objects! What do I see ? Instead of
falcons to train for the chase, as I supposed, here
are vulgar screech-owls ! A pretty business for an
<pb>
aspirant to knighthood: to set up as bo'dy-guard
for vermin! At your age, Kernis, I should have
wept for shame and anger, if my uncle, the baron de
Fougereuse, had given me such game to carry !"
" Then I am less sensitive than you, Messire
Walter, for I should not waste my tears on so
small a matter. When I receive a command, I
obey it. For the rest, I see no reason why I should
disdain to travel in company with screech-owls
which the King wishes to put in his aviary, and
which I myself caught for him. They are growing
tame. Wait! . . . suppose I open the door of the
cage?"
" No, no!" cried Walter, pushing back his chair.
" Nothing is lacking now but to set loose here that
brood of horrors. You are an incorrigible wag!
Take them away, my pretty tutor of screech-owls,
and explain " —
" Allow me to eat first, my lord, as I am famished.
Behold Martin, who has decided to produce his
viands. I drink to your very good health."
While the page appeased his hunger on a veni-
son steak, Walter silently inspected him. Lo'ic de
Kernis appeared to be fifteen or sixteen. His gay,
mobile face; his candid brows, shadowed with thick
blond hair; his dark blue eyes, with their trustful
and trustworthy glance; his frank smile and mis-
chievous air, belonged to the schoolboy and the
child. But his height and bearing, his physical
vigor, his proud, firm step, his ringing voice and
decisive speech, proclaimed the future soldier, as
<pb>
his independent conduct proclaimed him a Breton.
Though his dress was that of a royal page, and ex-
ceedingly elegant, his silver dagger-sheath being
a wonder of Italian chiselling, and the hilt of his
sword beautifully wrought, yet Lo'ic seemed no
more concerned than if he had been clad in burlap.
He never once turned his eyes upOn himself, to
survey the state of his costume.
"Explain, my child," Maulny resumed, after
some moments of private observation, "how it
happens that a lad of fifteen, not on his own
responsibility " —
" By your leave, I was sixteen years old at
Candlemas," interrupted Lo'ic.
"Very well. How does it happen that Master
Lo'ic, page and ward of my dear cousin Fougereuse,
Lo'ic, who is known to be an arrant featherbrain,
is out on the high road at this time of night
alone " —
" That proves how he can be depended upon,
despite his arrant featherbrainishness."
" At this time of night alone, as I was saying,
escorting a nestful of birds of prey, which he is
ready to scatter without warning on the heads of
a peaceful assembly ? "
" You aro precious uncivil to my fair friends,
Messire Walter. They behave as sedately as dow-
agers. See. . . . Come here, pretty, pretty! Is
it not provoking, when I would show them off to
you, not one will turn its head ? "
" To which birds of prey aforesaid," continued
<pb>
Walter imperturbably," he is much more attentive
than he is to his lord's blood-relations."
" Ah, that is why you are so hard, then, upon
my little owls I And, indeed, you are right. I
did not salute you when I came in. Pardon my
neglect, Messire de Maulny. I never dreamed
you did me the honor to be jealous of my atten-
tions, and I am quite ready to atone for my dis-
courtesy." Rising from table, the page bowed
very low, bringing his cap over his heart with a
sweeping gesture. " Your humble servant, my
sweet lord! ... And now you are, I believe,
properly saluted."
" Beautifully, count of Kernis I" answered Wal-
ter gallantly. " I consider that I have received
satisfaction."
" May I hope," continued Lo'ic, still cap in
hand, " that your estate of Maulny is in good
condition ? "
" In wretched condition, alas ! I intend to sell it.
And you — where did you leave your master ? "
" In wretched company, at Pre'cign^: that is,
in the society of those Englishmen Madame Mar-
garet has with her. If you love not night-birds,
Messire Walter, meddle not with them. The
hoarsest of my screech-owls is delightful by com-
parison. I could no longer put up with them ;
and if my master had not despatched me with
these princesses to the man who is to keep them,
I believe that I and the Saxons would have ended
by reciprocal assassination ! "
<pb>
" You are a stiff-necked Breton, and to the race-
hatreds of a Breton there is no truce. . . . You
say, then, that your guardian, humoring your dread
of the English, sent you out alone, with four mis-
erable bipeds, on a stormy night? It does not
seem of a piece with the habitual prudence of my
cousin Guy. Own up. You have broken bounds,
and are in full flight. I will respect your secret."
"Secret!" cried Lo'ic, with another peal of laugh-
ter. " A thousand thanks; but it would be so very
useless ! I make it a point of honor that my mas-
ter shall know of all my goings-on, and shall know
of them from my own lips. You see, in that way
I forestall all slander and misrepresentation."
" The candor of it is certainly edifying; yet it
must secure you some good round sermons as part
of the day's work."
" What of that, Messire Walter ? It is my nature
to prefer my master's scolding to a stranger's flat-
tery. Fergus does the same."
" Fergus ! Is that the hound who nearly ate me
up ? I compliment you on the tastes you share in
common, Kernis! . . . When shall I see Guy?"
" To-morrow, I think; for I am charged to tell
the major-domo to prepare the lodge at once. The
baron will come hither, preceding the King by a
few hours, in order to welcome to the palace of
Fougereuse, the lord Robert de Villepreux."
" Villepreux ! " Walter raised his voice a little.
" They told us he was dead in Palestine."
"He may be, in Palestine; but in Anjou he is
<pb>
as alive as he can possibly be, and Messire Guy is
happy enough over his resurrection. Their affec-
tion is closer than that of Roland and Oliver. We
shall hear now, I fancy, some fine tales of prowess,
and of exploits against the Saracens!"
" Villepreux ! " murmured Maulny. "Robert
the Lion, the Knight of the Round Table, the flower
of chivalry, without blame or fear; brave to mad-
ness, loyal up to the point of — sincerity! as de-
voted to his prince as a dog to his master, heroically
faithful to his friend and to his word: a Crusader
of old, who believes no Christian false. Ville-
preux, once the foe of Fougereuse, now his friend;
the one man in the world to whom Guy could offer
his hand, and ask of him at the same time the for-
getfulness of a hereditary feud. And now they
are brothers-in-arms, Oliver and Roland! This is
more of the chronic good luck of your master,
Loic."
" My master deserves just such a friend," replied
the page with animation; "and I do not see that
he need envy any of his qualities. For he, like
my lord of Villepreux, is without blame or fear,
brave, loyal, devoted, faithful, and all the rest."
" Is it news to me, my dear child ? " broke in
Walter, with an accent of ironic conviction. " Be-
fore you arrived in this world, I knew all my cou-
sin's perfections by heart. They merit a disciple
like you; prompt to admire them, and eager to cry
them up even in the desert, if needs be. I tell
you, Guy is fortunate in everything. I could never
<pb>
catch a retainer of this enthusiastic temper! I am
amazed that he does not rely more thoroughly upon
you. If I were he, I would withhold nothing from
you."
" Nothing in my master's career is kept secret
from me," said Lo'ic, straightening himself proudly.
"Really? Then you can tell what he conceals
in that mysterious retreat, that little apartment
over against his chamber, where, they say, he shuts
himself up for hours at a stretch."
" They say wrongly, my lord. The baron never
shuts himself up for hours at a stretch in that little
apartment. I am aware that he alone can open it,
as the door has neither lock nor key. But there
is no mystery about the place: it is a storeroom.
. . . What are you laughing at, Master Walter? "
" Take no offence, my pellucid youth. You con-
tradict the expression, 'As malicious as a page.'
Vincent knows better than you; be sure of that."
"Vincent? What can he know that I am ig-
norant of, I who keep close to my master as his
own shadow? . . . But Govier has always been
jealous to seem the only one in my lord's confi-
dence. He may have told you something silly, to
give you a sense of his own importance. I who
know " —
" You who know ? You divert me. They have
not initiated you yet, poor fellow, and Guy will
not answer for your discretion. In fact," Maulny
went on, as if to himself, " this child is a paragon
of heedlessness. He could see his master stand at
<pb>
the stake without dreaming that the flames would
burn him."
" What are you saying, sir? "
" Nothing, nothing at all. Finish your supper,
and take care of your screech-owls. The suspected
spot is a storeroom. I believe it, on your word
of honor. And if there be any sorcerer at my
cousin's, at least, my believing Breton, it is not
you."
" A sorcerer! " Lo'ic cried out, surprised and in-
dignant. " Are you growing crazy, Maulny?"
" It would appear that you are growing imperti-
nent, Kernis. There ! do not feel provoked; I was
not in earnest. According to you, then, Guy does
not give himself up, in private, to studies hidden
from the common herd. Have you ever been in
the place we are speaking of, Lo'ic ? "
" Never. Now that you remind me of it, I have
seen my master come forth from it, twice or thrice,
very early in the morning, looking pale, as if he
had not slept. And he was by no means overjoyed
to see me in the way, for he knit his eyebrows. I
gave him no reason to distrust me, however," con-
tinued the ingenuous lad, "and I can keep his
secrets as close as Vincent can."
"Guy has never been wise in his choice of con-
fidants," said Walter, in his most sympathetic tone.
" But to drop the subject, have you any court news
to give me ? "
" Yes. Antonio Blandini, the King's learned
physician, has left us, and gone back to Italy."
<pb>
" Is that so ? All the worse for the King; since
Antonio is a clever man, a genuine doctor, versed
in all sorts of science; and I have seen him work
some wonderful cures. The King never seemed to
wish him out of his sight. What was the cause of
his sudden disgrace ? "
" Please observe, Messire de Maulny, that it was
the doctor who disgraced his illustrious patient,
and not the King who exiled his ^Esculapius.
The misunderstanding between them began when
a certain Master Cornelius, a physician from Tom's,
given out to be the best pupil of the famous Coic-
tier, was sent hither by King Louis. You know
how much professional jealousy Antonio has!
Well, the medical advice of the stranger from
Touraine contradicted his own. Antonio had
kept the King under a strict regimen, and forbade
late hours, protracted feasting, imported wines, and
all that. Now Master Cornelius, who is a courtier,
and does nothing by halves, changed the whole
order of things, removed the restrictions, allowed
his Majesty to follow his own whims, and to mul-
tiply his entertainments and festivities. Antonio's
emphatic protests went for nothing. So it befell,
in due time, that the King came down with quar-
tan ague, thanks to his sailing all one evening
among the mists of the river Maine. The two
doctors met beside his pillow, each advocating a
different system, and refusing to yield an inch.
Cornelius was very arrogant in his manner. And
Antonio, seeing the King hesitate between them,
<pb>
and endeavor to harmonize their hostile theories,
turned about indignantly. ' During the fifty years
that I have followed the practice of medicine,' he
said, ' I have always held and taught that a physi-
cian should be the sovereign authority over his
patient. Since my right is contested, I abdicate.'
'Hear my haughty doctor!' rejoined the King.
Abdicate, indeed ; it is a royal word. What then? '
And that ended it. Despite the opposition of my
master, Antonio left the palace that same night;
and never once since has he been seen in Angers,
or anywhere in the neighborhood. Master Corne-
lius meanwhile regulates the health of our lord
the King, and has succeeded in changing his quar-
tan ague into tertian ague."
"Until it becomes quotidian and malignant, all
to the greater glory and advantage of Louis, King
of France. Does our gracious liege miss Antonio? "
" He is inconsolable over his departure. They
say he would give his right arm to get him back.
But Antonio will never return."
"Do you think so? The forfeit of a prince's
favor is a thing to be regretted."
Lo'ic shook his head. "No, messire; at least,
not by that man. He lived for nothing but science;
he cared no whit for wealth or advancement. In
his eyes there was neither rich nor poor, neither
old nor young : only the sick, or, rather, only sick-
nesses. ' I have a fever to allay here, I have a
pleurisy to look out for there'—that was his
manner of speech. He scarcely ever mentioned a
<pb>
name. He judged of a man's worth by the gravity
of his disease : and he preferred a thousand-fold a
peasant with the plague, to a gouty lord. As to
healthy folk, they are a breed which he ruled out
of his universe, and despised heartily."
" A strange character," sighed Walter thought-
fully. He was silent for a few minutes, gazing
dreamily at the burning logs. The clock of the
great room chimed sonorously, one, two, three ; and
Jacob spanned with his hand the ten crown pieces,
the sum at stake.
" I have won!" he announced energetically, "for
Vincent has not returned."
" One moment," cried Bodin, covering the coins
with his big hand, " one moment! Be the um-
pire, Messire de Maulny. Vincent never said he
would return at three o'clock."
" He said he would return before three o'clock!"
contradicted Jacob; " and that if he did not, he
would be dead. So " —
" Vincent! of what Vincent are you talking ? "
asked Lo'ic, lifting his head. " Was Vincent
Govier here, waiting for me ? "
" Govier is the person in question," answered
Walter. " He was here some hours ago, but
seized with a fit of ill-nature, he left us behind,
and posted off to Pouill£ woods to find the game-
keeper, whom he thought to be in need of correc-
tion. And these merry-andrews laid a wager upon
his return. That is all."
" That is all, is it ? Why did you not tell me
<pb>
sooner ? What is the real trouble ? Vincent beat-
ing the woods, past midnight; to surprise old Fari-
bault! Vincent stipulating his own death, in case
he does not come back at the time agreed upon !
. . . What is at the bottom of this ? . . . You
are deceiving me. Bodin, you are an old soldier:
tell me the truth ! "
" I can tell you nothing, my young lord, except
that there is a light in Wolfram's turret to-night,
and that this miserable Jacob has been relating
stories which give one the shivers. Messire de
Maulny made fun of them; and then Vincent
swore he would go over to catch the Devil at his
orgies. ' He promised to return promptly. I be-
gin to believe that something may have happened
to him."
But Lo'ic demanded further explanations ; and,
importuned by the eager page, Bodin had to repeat
in detail all that had passed. As soon as he under-
stood the situation, Loi'c de Kernis broke out into
reproaches and angry invective : —
" What notion did Vincent have, think you ? Is
it not a shame for men to take alarm because old
Wolf comes back to ask for prayers ? . . . It is
just like these Angevins ! In Brittany everybody
has seen signs and wonders, and understands how
to deal with the spirit-world. Piteux is a coward,
and he spreads around him a contagion of fear.
And Master Walter, with all his philosophy, allow-
ing such folly under his very eyes! And keeping
me here more than an hour, making me talk non-
<pb>
sense, instead of telling me that Vincent was over
yonder. Bodin, you will have to answer on your
life for whatever comes of it!"
" Hush, hush, firebrand! " exclaimed Walter
sharply. " You will wear out our patience with
this gabble. Am I to control the actions of
equerries belonging to my cousin Guy, and render
an account of them to his pages? . . . Vincent
has gone of his own free will to pick up a quarrel
with Satan, and if he succeeds, why, by my soul,
that is his own affair."
" And my affair too! " cried Lo'ic in exaspera-
tion. " Govier is a retainer of the house of Fou-
gereuse, and the baron would never be reconciled
to lose him. Give me a lantern, Martin!"
" What would you do, Messire Loic ? Would you
also " —
"I also. Precisely. I am going to Vincent's
rescue; and if you have any feeling for an old
comrade, you will come along with me."
" Of a certainty you are mad !" said Walter.
" I would to Heaven" I were the only one here
who is mad. But I intend to be as mad as I like,
mad to the hilt. Though all the demons strangle
me, and the sorcerers weave spells over me, and
the night-hags wring my neck, and the other
sprites drag me into their dance, and the lost souls
singe me with their fires, I must discover what has
become of my master's equerry ! Now, are you
ready, innkeeper? For if you are afraid, I will go
alone."
<pb>
"I am with you, messire," answered Bodin,
moved by the boy's resolute spirit, and secretly
rejoiced to be able to succor a former fellow-
soldier. " I am with you. Only let me take a
stout cudgel, and the blessed candle ! "
And so armed with weapons spiritual and tem-
poral, Loi'c and Bodin departed from the Red
Rose, reckless of the torrent of rain, and the roar-
ing of the furious wind. Walter, face to face with
Jacob, made a sign for him to open the window.
Piteux obeyed silently, and leaned out.
" The light burns on just the same, my lord."
"Very well."
" The page and my good cousin are headed
straight for FcuiHe" wood."
" That is their business."
"Would you like to see me follow them, my
lord?"
"If you have any reason for doing so, do so."
" I have no reason, save the desire of serving
you."
" I would not take it ill of you. Be prudent."
"Depend upon me, messire !"
Jacob disappeared. Walter de Maulny was left
alone with his thoughts. Time passed in the
great room, where the silence was unbroken save
by the regular tick-tick of the clock, and the
mournful hoot of the screech-owls abandoned by
Lo'ic. Maulny, disagreeably impressed by these
birds of ill omen, turned his back to them, and
placed his elbows on the sill of the yet open win-
<pb>
dow. At last, he heard the sound of footsteps
and of voices from the road. A moment later a
key grated in the lock, and Bodin entered, sup-
porting Lo'ic, who was pale and overcome.
"What has happened?" asked Walter anx-
iously.
"Very little," replied the weak voice of the
page. " I fell from a tree; but I had seen noth-
ing."
Martin assisted him to the armchair, bathed
his bruised forehead with fresh water, and gave
him a cordial to drink: all this with a tender
solicitude which one would not have looked for in
a man of his sort. To Maulny's questioning, Lo'ic
answered in disjointed phrases, repeating stub-
bornly, " I had seen nothing."
Bodin shook his head, murmuring:
"It was by an accident, messire, a mere acci-
dent. And for all our efforts, we have no tidings
of Vincent."
Walter saw plainly that the innkeeper knew no
more. Awaiting the return of his spy, he resigned
himself to act as nurse to the wounded, and lavish
his attentions on him. Lo'ic was moved to the
best room in the lied Rose, and laid upon the best
bed. The lord of Maulny himself offered to ex-
amine his injuries. This was no easy task. The
page complained that his every limb was broken,
screamed if Walter tried to touch him, and grew
half delirious when there was talk of informing
his master. Incoherent words, causeless laughter,
<pb>
snatches of song, now sad, now jovial, streamed
from Lo'ic's lips, all night long.
"A bad business, a bad business!" growled
Martin. "A fate has overtaken this poor lad.
May it never fall upon me!"
Towards morning Lo'ic seemed more calm. He
asked for his screech-owls, and the cage was brought
to him. He then declared his wish to sleep, and
complained so loudly of the din which, according
to him, Walter and Bodin were making, that they
finally retired, and left their patient by himself.
A half-hour later, the innkeeper came down the
staircase, unmanned.
" My lord, it is diabolical! I shall sell the Red
Rose."
"What is up?" cried Walter.
" The page's chamber is empty .. His horse is
no longer in the stable ! Yet nobody has seen
him, nor heard him leave."
Thought Walter : " He was playing 'upon us
with his mock hysterics. I will get at the mean-
ing of this."
The first rays of the dawn were breaking, when
Jacob Piteux arrived at the door of the Red Rose,
and knocked softly. Walter, alone in the lower
room, let him in noiselessly.
" You are late, rogue. Did you find Vincent? "
" Indeed, my lord, I found no Vincent. He has
vanished, evaporated, leaving not a trace behind.
And as for the page " —
" That page is a sly one! What has he done
<pb>
but gone off without a word of warning, after
having kept us on our feet the entire night, pre-
tending to be suffering agonies? "
" He, he, he! That is not an ill move for a
novice. The lad knew no other means of getting
out of it, my lord."
" But what came to pass ?" asked Maulny
abruptly. " Are you presuming to play upon my
credulity ? Speak ! or if not" —
"Eh, my good lord, do not push a man too
hard! A little patience, and you will learn. I
reached the accursed house just in time to see that
madcap of a Lo'ic tumble from a tree which stands
over against the lighted window. It amazed me,
because he is nimble as a wildcat; and I was still
more amazed to hear him wail and moan like a
six-months-old baby. Martin hoisted him on his
shoulders, and carried him from the wood, while
I remained to ferret the thing out. Having ex-
amined the vicinity of the house, and discovered,
sheltered under a shed made of boughs, a horse,
saddled and bridled, I made up my mind to await
the rider. I had to wait long, crouched in the
shrubbery. At last, a figure glided from the foot
of the turret, and came straight to the faithful
horse; it was the figure of a richly clad gentle-
man. He carried a lantern, as if to show me
his face the more clearly, and he spoke to the
animal, so that I could not fail to recognize his
voice.
"And he was—?" added Walter eagerly.
<pb>
" Your beloved kinsman, the baron Guy de
Fougereuse."
" Guy ! " cried Maulny. " Guy de Fougereuse !
Guy!"
" Yes, my lord; himself in person," Jacob re-
peated dryly; " and to speak truth, I have sus-
pected as much for a long while."
Maulny hardly seemed to hear these last words.
Absorbed in his own train of thought, he reflected
for a moment, his forehead supported on his hand.
Then, lifting his head with an imperious gesture,
he murmured between his shut teeth:
" It shall be between us two. Fougereuse, I
will know your secret yet!"
</div>
<pb>
<div id="disgrace" code="1" wordcount="15551">
CHAPTER II.
DISGRACE.
KBNT. " Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honored as my King.
Loved as my father, as my master followed,
As my great patron thought on in my prayers !
LKAK. Kent! on thy life, no more."
SHAKESPEARE, King Lear, Act I.
IF there be any country where Saint Martin's
summer is at once sweet as spring and melancholy
as autumn, it is surely the province of Anjou.
On the 15th of November, in the year 1470, the
sun rose brilliantly on a pure sky, and the trans-
parent air gave an ideal glory to the distant land-
scape across the Maine. The meadows of Reculee
were sparkling under the morning dew; the leaves
of the poplars which encircled the grotto and the
tiny convent of Baumette were yet of the clear
golden tint which follows the green of the year's
prime. The imposing ducal castle, defended by
seventeen towers, and surrounded by deep moats,
had a festal mien. At the very top of the ram-
parts, where the banners of Anjou, Aragon, and
Sicily were floating free, was a group of soldiers,
<pb>
squires, and attendants, wearing the royal liveries
The gardens and terraces were overrun by a motley
crowd. Moors, Jews, Italians, Spaniards, men of
Provence and of Lorraine, called one another in
as many languages. Famous painters, courteous
poets, wise doctors and astronomers, dignified
magistrates, rich merchants, grotesque jesters,
some in bright scarlet, some in the duke's sober
colors, white, gray, and black, moved about, in-
termingled in picturesque disorder. The people
choked the narrow ways in the neighborhood of the
castle, crying, ''Noel!" to each nobleman, as he
clattered past with his train. In the courtyard of
the palace all was stir and bustle and merry uproar.
Steeds were pawing and neighing; the streamers
on the lances, the knights' pennons, the armorial
ensigns, were fluttering on the breeze; beauti-
fully embossed armor glittered on every hand;
pages and equerries gathered here and there about
their lords : for the radiant chivalry of Anjou and
Provence was assembling under the eye of its
prince. Before Queen Margaret of England and
her young son Edward, Prince of Wales, they
were preparing to rehearse the " passage-at-arms of
Joyous Garde." Margaret of Anjou, the daughter
of Rene*, the wife of Henry the Sixth of England,
still a comely woman, and as full as ever of that
indomitable pride which the defeats of the Wars
of the Roses had not been able to quench, leaned
against a sculptured balcony. She smiled upon
her son, who was leading up and down, under the
<pb>
window, a blooded courser; and in her motherly
pride, she seemed already to behold the crown of
England on his boyish head. Alas, that dream
was to cost him dear! But for the moment no
sinister forecast overhung the serenity of the blue
skies of Anjou; nothing darkened the splendid
holiday. The laughing pasture-land made one
forget sorrow, and charmed away all premonition
and regret. Margaret felt the universal beguile-
ment; those near her remarked a softened ex-
pression in her heroic features. Close to her sat
the young winsome queen, Joan of Laval, King
Rene''s second wife, the loyal companion of his
declining years. Around the two queens was a
bevy of maids of honor, dark-eyed damsels from
Provence, and the blond heads of Anjou. In the
very last row stood a young girl, with a serious
even pensive air: Isabelle de Fougereuse, sister
of the baron Guy. Reared in the saintly shades
of the monastery of Our Lady of Ronceray, and
chosen but two months before to be among the
personal followers of Queen Joan, Isabelle felt
a little aloof from her gay associates and their
light, unreserved prattle. The new world on
which she had entered surprised her without win-
ning her over. She, who was the flower of purity
and truth, had great unconscious beauty; but a
glance of admiration disconcerted her, and made
her hide behind her laughing comrades. One
might truly apply to her what Dante said of his
Beatrice: —
<pb>
" She walks with humbleness for her array.
Merely the sight of her makes all things bow."
" Isabelle! " It was the lively Yolande de Beau-
vau, daughter of the seneschal, who whispered in
her ear. "The King is growing uneasy because
your brother is not here. What has happened to
him ? Nothing goes well when he is away. The
tourney is not opening as it should; the English
lords are tossing their heads. Is not the honor of
Anjou in danger ? "
"Guy has been delayed by the arrival of his
friend, the lord of Villepreux," answered Isa-
belle. "He has just come out of Palestine with
the strangest company: baptized Saracens, con-
verted renegades, and Christians rescued from
slavery, all of whom the King wished to appear in
the jousts to-day. Guy is staying at the manse
to see that they are properly accoutred, despite
the protest of my lord Robert, who is not very
eager to show off in public his ' Society of the
Penitent Thief,' as he calls it. I left them con-
tending over it. But I hope the King may soon
have his wish."
"I am so glad he expressed the wish!" cried
Yolande. "Do you hear that, Bertha, Lucy, Clo-
tilde? We are to have negroes and Christian
Paynims in the tilt-yard! Villepreux the Lion
caught them, and brought them into the Church;
and some day he will help them to found a mon-
astery in memory of the Penitent Thief, where the
<pb>
priest will sing Mass in a turban and a coat-of-'
mail, with a scimitar at his side! "
And the news, flying from lip to lip, made a
great sensation, and reached the ear of Joan the
Queen, who smiled approvingly. Thenceforth all
eyes were fixed impatiently on the great door, and
were no longer interested in present preparations
for the festivities.
While the baron Guy and his famous friend
Villepreux were thus expected, the town house
of Fougereuse was all astir, as well as the ducal
castle. The unforeseen command of King Rene",
his express request that the " Society of the Peni-
tent Thief " should figure in the tournament, had
turned everything upside down. Horses had to
be provided for these numerous riders; and the
fierce, tawny men, wearing their old raiment of
the East, had to be arrayed so that they should
not be put to shame by the luxurious attire of the
court. Time was pressing. Meanwhile two per-
sons, one a big, burly individual already growing
awkwardly fat, the other slight and insignificant,
with a cringing, sullen aspect, burst into the court
through the folding doors, and insisted that they
must have speech with the master of Fougereuse.
Nobody listened to them; there was too much busi-
ness on hand, of a verity! Men and horses,
Christians and Saracens, French and Orientals,
were inextricably mixed up, beckoning, calling,
working, running, as busily and confusedly as an
army under fire. But, nothing daunted, the thin
<pb>
stranger, who was none other than Jacob, accom-
panied by his cousin Martin, accosted a groom
hurrying by.
" Good sir, we must see your master on impor-
tant business. Two of his household have been
abducted."
"What nonsense! We are here in our full
strength; not one response is lacking when the roll
is called. See my lord, would you ? It is easy to
talk. Run off, run off."
"Consider, my friend," said Martin, "the
matter relates to Master Vincent Govier, the
baron's chief equerry, and " —
"Consult him about it, then, and worry me no
more."
" Consult him!" repeated Martin in dismay.
"What an ill-conducted house is this, that they
have not even informed themselves whether poor
Vincent be in Heaven or worse! "
A deep voice, roundly scolding some negligent
lackeys, became audible a few feet away. Jacob
drew back with a cry of amazement, while Martin
Bodin sprang forward. Vincent Govier, in com-
plete armor, with a cap of chain mail, steel-pointed,
stood below the entrance steps, issuing orders, and
supervising the preparations.
"O my friend Vincent! Living! living!"
shrieked Jacob, throwing up his arms. " May Our
Lady and Saint Eloy, and the great Saint Maurice
and his companions be blessed! "
" Tra-la-la! Go on with your litany! " was the
<pb>
rude reply of the equerry, as he avoided the em-
braces of honest Bodin. "What is the cause of
your lamentations and thanksgivings ? Have I not
a right to be living ? What put you up to coming
here at all?"
" We thought you were dead ! " gasped Mar-
tin.
" I am not dead; and that is all there is to it.
And if I were dead, how would it concern you ?
Did I ask you to bury my remains? Begone, with
your blanched gills, and eyes bulging out of your
heads, and leave me in peace !"
"But, Vincent, man," wailed Jacob, "will you
not at least tell us how you escaped the Devil's
claws, on your excursion to the haunted house? "
" I did not visit the haunted house," Govier
answered. " What have you to say to that? If I
chose to return to my duty instead of coursing
after goblins and ghosts, am I not my own master?
Clear out! You are wasting my time for me."
"You yourself declared, 'If I do not come
back, it will be because I am killed,'" continued
Jacob. " We took you at your word."
The equerry burst into a ringing laugh, though
it sounded a little forced ; and he gripped Piteux's
bony arm. "Look at the manikin!" he cried,
shaking him .vigorously. "Was there ever such
insolence ? Summoning me to die at his beck, on
the ground that I gave him my promise to do so,
over the wine-cup, and disputing the liberty which
I take to remain overground.! Martin, my old
<pb>
crony, persuade your relative to go hang himself,
that I may encounter him no more forever."
He loosened his hold on Jacob, who tottered and
nearly fell; and he turned his back on Bodin,
with a decisive movement which plainly meant,
" You two imbeciles, you ! "
" Master Govier, Master Govier!" It was a
page who called thus, coming out upon the steps.
"Where are you? Hurry! My lord is in need
of you."
The equerry went quickly towards him. Bodin,
stiffening with his astonishment, recognized Lo'ic
de Kernis as he stood talking with Vincent. The
youth Avas in a superb costume of silver and blue,
the Fougereuse colors. He had resumed his
usual .brisk and easy carriage, evidently not re-
membering how moribund was his state, some
hours before, at the Red Rose.
"Perdition!" murmured Martin. "The two
of them ! For a resuscitated creature, yonder lad
is sufficiently jolly. And 'there was I, carrying
him on my back like the good Samaritan, and car-
ing for him as piously as if he had been my own
father ! If ever I saw the like ! ". . .
" Come along, then, cousin !" said Jacob, pull-
ing the innkeeper by the sleeve. " We are better
out of this." And the couple slipped through
the courtyard, and were lost in the crowd.
A flourish of trumpets meantime announced
the beginning of the jousts. The heralds-at-arms
were giving the signals to enter the lists, " Let
<pb>
z
o
o
o
o
Q.
<pb>
the champions advance !" when sudden cries of,
"Noel to the Crusaders!" "God wills it!,"
drowned every other sound. A thrill of impa-
tience and curiosity swept through the noble assem-
bly ; with acclamations they greeted the welcome
arrival of Robert de Villepreux and his Penitent
Thieves. Fougereuse had succeeded wonderfully
in his equipment of the cortege. That group of
men bronzed by the Eastern sun, with their strange
array, their fierce, haughty faces; that leader, ea-
sily carrying a suit of armor of Richard Lionheart's
time, the antique helmet pierced only with two
holes for the eyes; that banner of the triumphant
Cross, with its device, " Diex vult," — all this was a
living vision of the bygone Crusades. The popu-
lar imagination, especially that of the knights,
felt the enchantment of the past; and a spon-
taneous shout, " Hail to Jerusalem! Hail to the
Cross! " uprose from a thousand hearts. The en-
sign of Villepreux, raising the visor of his casque
and revealing the well-known features of Guy
de Fougereuse, saluted gallantly with his sword,
as he passed under the balcony of Joan the Queen,
while Villepreux himself slowly lowered the tip of
his lance. King Rene", standing on the platform
erected for the judges of the day's prowess, re-
ceived the homage of the ne\v-comers.
" Sire," said Fougereuse, reining in his charger
in front of the royal box, "your Majesty's leal sub-
ject, Messire Robert de Villepreux, humbly begs
pardon for so great a delay. But Palestine is a
<pb>
far land, and he was unable to return so speedily
as he desired. He brings with him captive Arabs,
baptized heathen, Christian men ransomed from
slavery; and with these does he desire to do
fealty unto his sovereign and gracious lord. What
is your Majesty's will in his regard ? "
" Our good pleasure is that our trusty Ville-
preux shall come forward, sir standard-bearer, and
salute us. Let him hear from our own mouth the
praise due to his prowess, and the expression of
our joy at his return."
Villepreux dismounted, tossing the bridle to
Lo'ic, and ascended the steps of the scaffolding
where Ren6 had seated himself. " With raised
visor, Robert," whispered Fougereuse. " You are
forgetting."
Robert obeyed; and Ms proud eyes, his soldierly,
austere face, framed in the helmet of burnished
steel, towered up among the throng of nobles
gathered around the King. To him he bent the
knee, with the profound respect and glad fidelity
of the subject vassal, and renewed his oath of hom-
age. Rene raised him kindly, and with fatherly
affection pressed him in his arms.
" I longed to have you back among us, my brave
knight! I know that over yonder you have ri-
valled the feats of Richard Lionheart, working
for the freedom of Christians in Jerusalem. And
I think the golden collar of our Order of the Cres-
cent could not be in a better place than over against
your breastplate." Then, detaching the precious
<pb>
chain which hung from his neck, the King fastened
it, with his own hands, around Villepreux's. The
lords applauded; the crowd again cried, "Noel!"
Walter de Maulny grew pale with smothered
rage and jealousy. The honor so lightly granted
to Villepreux, in open tournament, had been re-
fused to him. Among the courtiers, he was al-
most the only one who wore no insignia of any of
the numerous orders of knighthood instituted by
the Duke of Anjou. His evil star shone for him
in all the events of the day; he made a most luck-
less choice of adversaries. Unhorsed at the very
first encounter by Villepreux, whose charge was
worthy of his fame in the Holy Land, and defeated,
after a trial of skill and agility, by Fougereuse,
Maulny determined to revenge himself on a rider
whose shield bore no device. His victory was
only too quick and easy. The young knight,
thrown to the ground under his mount, was picked
up unconscious; and on a wave of general con-
sternation, the rumor of the death of Prince Ed-
ward of Lancaster ran about among the crowd.
Queen Margaret withdrew in haste from the bal-
cony, and did not return, although the prince
himself, recovering from his faint, assured her
that he had suffered no harm.
The award of the day was decreed to Guy
de Fougereuse, whose courage and capacity dis-
tanced all rivals. Robert de Villepreux, unwilling
to make parade of his extraordinary strength in a
passage-at-arms, had not sought to wrest from his
<pb>
friend the glory of being first in the jousts. The
" good luck of Fougereuse" held in all things.
The young favorite saw his fortune and influence
increase day after day. Life smiled upon him.
His happy nature, wonderfully dowered with va-
ried aptitudes, lent itself without effort to the
exercise of each. Be it to break a lance, to rhyme
a virelay, to organize a festival, to lead an assault,
to chase the wild boar, to dance the pavane, to con-
fer with an ambassador, — Fougereuse was perfect
at it. He spoke several languages well, and he
was a student of such sciences as were known at
that time. A good singer, a minstrel-poet, Guy
possessed, with all his agreeable worldly graces, a
very keen knowledge of men. His policy proved
a check to the ambitious designs of Louis XI. over
Anjou, and held Rene, in his old age, to a firm and
cautious line of conduct. He bore his sovereign
an all but filial veneration, and was devoted to him
for better or worse: it was to this true attachment,
and its absolute disinterestedness, that Fougereuse
owed the favor of the king. Besides, his natural
good humor and sweetness of character endeared
him to all. But though his manner was evenly
gracious to every one, he was at heart, under a gay
and serene exterior, inaccessible; and he was chary
of his intimacies. Villepreux was his one and
only familiar friend; despite their marked contrast
of temperament, they lived in undivided love.
Villepreux, so independent as to be almost rude,
bluntly sincere, happiest on the battlefield, and a
<pb>
»
despiser of pleasures, was more feared than loved
at court. Yet even there he was generally es-
teemed. Meanness, cowardice, falsehood, dared
:not show themselves to those loyal eyes which no
danger had ever clouded; to that open brow which
had never inclined itself before the might of injus-
tice. The most cunning slander fell powerless in
presence of honor so spotless, and of such a shining
name. Maulny had spoken truly when he had
compared Robert to the paladins of the olden time.
What now excited his rage was to see his foe safe-
guarded by the friendship of Villepreux.
The evening hours of the festival were as bril-
liant as the passage-at-arms had been. Southern
dances, the slow stately steps of Spain and of Pro-
vence, gave full play to the grace of girlhood, and
the elegance of the younger nobles. Then the com-
pany broke into groups, and followed their indi-
vidual whims. At one end of the hall, the King
leaned over a table, surrounded with his architects,
looking at sketches and plans. Both Queens, with
their ladies of honor, seated near a window, were
amusing themselves with the wit of the dwarfs
Phelipot and Tuybelin, and the tales of a trouba-
dour. Not far away, Isabelle de Fougereuse was
softly singing, at the request of some English
dames, a simple Christmas hymn which she had
learned at her convent school. Elsewhere a min-
strel accompanied with the chords of his guitar the
voice of a young page, who was trolling a roundel
of Charles of Orleans: —
<pb>
•
" Scatter, scatter, run to cover,
Worry, Care, and Melancholy!
Though ye ruled me, in my folly,
Slave am I no more, nor lover.
Scatter, scatter, run to cover,
Worry, Care, and Melancholy ! "
Laughter was on every lip, joy in every eye. In
that gay palace, one's sole concern seemed to be to
pass the time gently away, as if there were nothing
in the world, save pleasure, which was worth pur-
suing. Villepreux, withdrawn into a deep alcove,
looked out thoughtfully over the radiant company.
He saw his friend Guy, the hero of the day, step-
ping smilingly among the eager courtiers. He saw
Isabelle, frankly happy at her brother's success,
glowing with natural lightness of heart. He saw
Maulny, who, grave, proud, conventional, appeared
absorbed in a political conversation with Lord
Rous. To an ordinary spectator, indeed, the pic-
ture would have suggested no lurking shadow.
But it gave Robert a painful impression; his eye-
brows contracted. He seemed to be aware in a
moment that whispers were exchanged wherever
Fougereuse passed, and that gossip broke off at
Isabelle's approach. Malicious glances from be-
hind a fan, a mocking nod of the head, a murmured
but emphatic confidential word, lent him a foretaste
of distant but certain calamity. And all too soon
Villepreux heard voices close by which gave him
a pang, and changed his causeless anxiety into open
wrath.
<pb>
"What is this rumor about Fougereuse?" It
was Yolande de Beauvau who questioned Cornelius,
the King's new physician. " You, who know every-
thing, should know what is at the bottom of it.
They talk, do they not, of enchanted arms, and of
a fairy lance which can overturn every combatant
it touches?"
"Not quite that, Yolande," answered other fem-
inine accents. " It concerns a haunted house
given in fief to the Devil by Guy de Fougereuse.
If ever the baron requires anything of his vassal,
he goes thither to issue orders; and they are al-
ways obeyed. I heard that he has been there this
very night."
" Oh!" exclaimed several bystanders. " Fouge-
reuse ! Who would have believed it ? "
"Everybody says so," was the authoritative an-
swer of the last speaker. Protests were silenced
by this assurance.
" Here, then, is the secret of Fougereuse's as-
tounding good luck!" said the young Geoffrey
d'Anglure.
"But what do you think, master?" insisted
Yolande de Beauvau, addressing Cornelius. "I
should like to ascertain the truth."
" My noble ladies," the doctor began, in his most
important tone, " the exact truth in such matters
is by no means easy to ascertain. Nevertheless, I
must say that the singular influence of Fougereuse
over our sire the King, the prolonged period for
which he holds the King's favor, the success which
<pb>
in all comes as easily to lam as if he were playing
with it, — these things hardly seem to be the work
of nature alone. It may be, that abetted by the
powers of the air, that is, by the infernal legions of
whom we read in Holy Writ (a& insidiis diabo-
lis, by the insidious demons), it may be, I allow,
that the baron de Fougereuse is possessed of some
occult powers. Since his intimate friend and my
predecessor, Antonio Blandini, went away, have
you not noticed that my illustrious patient and
liege lord, King Rene of Anjou, whom may God
preserve! is failing and growing weaker, despite
all my care? The baron's dearest wish is to un-
dervalue my skill, in order to secure Antonio's
return. . . . Draw your own conclusions."
" A spell cast?" said Geoffrey.
" The evil eye?" said a Neapolitan knight.
"Perchance, gentlemen; perchance downright
sorcery, forbidden arts, witchcraft, a murder in
effigy."
"Viper!" cried Villepreux, coming suddenly
between the young d'Anglure and the startled
physician. "Viper! repeat but that calumny, and
I will crush you beneath my heel. And what are
you doing here, sir knights ? A contemptible liar
and parvenu, a man with an end to gain by it, drags
in the dust the reputation of one of your brothers-
in-arms—and you endure it! Nay, worse: you
listen, you smile at his wretched inventions! By
Heaven, my lords, your laughter has a ready flow.
If this sort of amusement is considered so choice,
<pb>
it would be more loyal in you not to forbid him
to share it on whose good name you batten. It is
such fair play, attacking the absent! But if you
would injure Fougereuse, and would do it with im-
punity, be careful not to attempt it before me."
The prompt intervention of Robert had its effect
upon the few who were tearing to tatters between
them the repute of Fougereuse: it threw them
into consternation and disorder. The rash maids
drew back affrighted from the indignant flash in
the eyes of the enraged soldier; the leech Corne-
lius, as if struck by a thunderbolt, glided away like
a shadow, up the length of the tapestried wall;
the Neapolitan also disappeared at Villepreux's
vehement opening speech; Geoffrey d'Anglure,
and certain youths, who were drawn into the alter-
cation without thoroughly understanding what it
was about, were the only ones of the group to hear
Robert de Villepreux close his arraignment with an
intended challenge.
" How is this ?" cried the bystanders, as soon
as the chevalier had spoken; " a quarrel in the
King's presence?"
" What is the matter,Villepreux ? " asked Walter
de Maulny, approaching the alcove. " Do you
fancy yourselves still among the Paynims ? Would
you slaughter in the very ballroom the hope of
the chivalry of Anjou ? "
" If the Lion must roar," some one added sarcas-
tically, "let him return to his desert lair."
" Enough, gentlemen!" Villepreux replied, in a
<pb>
steady and controlled voice. " I was defending the
honor of my friend. Those to whom I addressed
myself will find me prepared at any time to main-
tain my words."
A hand laid upon his arm restrained him, as
he touched his sword-hilt in defiance. Turning
quickly, with a motion to shake himself free, he
came face to face with Guy de Fougereuse.
" It is all folly, Robert," said the young favor-
ite, in his authoritative way. " Have you not for-
gotten where you are? . . . And you, my dear
d'Anglure, when next you would malign»me, let
me be the sole audience. I have such dangerously
warm friends! . . . Pardon the too great vivacity
of this particular one, my lords. I think his wars
in foreign lands have driven out of his mind the
golden rule of life at court: —
' To see all things, and notice naught;
To hear, but show not; nor, untaught,
Say ever a word of the known and thoughts
My cousin Maulny, do you come to my aid in mak-
ing peace between these two noble champions who
have vowed to stand upon their dignity. Is it
not a hard, hard vow to keep in this world, Mas-
ter Cornelius?" Then, passing his arm through
Robert's, the speaker led him away, leaving Geof-
frey d'Anglure and Cornelius bewildered at the
turn the event had taken, and persuaded, more
strongly than ever, of the mesmeric power of Guy
de Fougereuse.
<pb>
"Guy, this is no place for me," began Villepreux,
as soon as they had reached a great porch which
overlooked the gardens. " You will only craze me
by requiring me to stay. Let me go back to the
house."
" Go then, Lion of mine," answered Fougereuse.
"It is hardly the time for explanations. I dare not
disclaim your generous defence of me; and yet
nothing is more likely to harm me."
" Harm you, Guy ! Have you grown to be so
much of a courtier that you would sacrifice your
friends to uphold your enemies ? If I believed
that" —
" Good-night, Robert! " exclaimed the young
baron, with a sweetly whimsical smile. " I take to
heart what Walter once said of you, ' Never be
cross with Villepreux, whatever he does; he is
newly come from Palestine.'" And with this Guy
wrung his comrade's hand, and returned to the
festal hall.
Villepreux, on leaving the palace, crossed the
court of honor and the gardens, without much
thought of whither he was walking, strayed aim-
lessly awhile along the terraces, and ended by
tin-owing himself on a stone bench sheltered by a
hedge of holly. The solitude, the quiet, the pure
fresh air of the beautiful starry night, breathed
peace, little by little, into the wounded spirit of the
loyal knight. He had been wroth with Cornelius,
and vexed with Geoffrey d'Anglure and the others;
but he had ached at hearing Fougereuse blame him
<pb>
for his conduct, and he comforted himself with the
thought of a frank understanding to be had with
him. A great many things might have come to
pass while he was away. And, after all, was the
quicksand of any court the right ground for him,
a man in love with war and glory ?
"It matters little," he reflected. "But for a
choice of foes, give me a Saracen rather than a
courtier. At least, with the former one can play
an open game, and strike straight ahead!"
" What under the moon are you doing here,
Villepreux ?" The voice of Walter de Maulny
was close to his ear. " Were you not able to go
out by the main door? Come with me: I shall
have the eastern postern-gate thrown open, and
you can profit by it."
Robert followed him, asking himself how it was
that Maulny's presence invariably woke in him
a sense of repugnance and hostility. As soon as
the two were side by side, in the narrow, crooked
streets of the town, Walter, with his cat-like
stealth, came close to his companion and took his
arm, as if to make Villepreux lean a little towards
him. "Do you know, Lion," he began in confi
dential tones, "you wasted all your fine anger just
now. They were but contending to see who could
exasperate you best. It was a pity to spoil tlie
scene, for it was pretty enough to have gone bodily
into some troubadour's tale. It makes me laugh
now, to think of those prattlers falling into a blue
fright at the sight of your tall figure and your
<pb>
angry countenance! Before you had uttered four
words, there was a general rout; and it took every
atom of courage he had to keep Geoffrey firm on
his feet. Another time, my dear Crusader, make
a better choice of foes! It is hardly worthy of
you to vent such fury upon a flock of girls, gentle-
men of tender age, and an old leech very fond of
his personal safety; and the worst of it is, Fou-
gereuse will not be in the least grateful for your
services. Your aggressiveness has compromised
him, up to the neck, as we say. What was only a
rumor this evening will be cried from the house-
tops to-morrow, thanks to you."
" What ought to be cried on the housetops,
thanks to me," Robert replied, disengaging his
arm from Walter's pressure, " is that to permit
one's fellow-soldier to be insulted before one's
face, is an action which calls for degradation from
the rank of knighthood! "
"Ah, yes: you are from Palestine, my noble
friend. If everybody were of your mind, merit
would have no detractors, and royal partisanships
would breed no jealousy. But who dreams of
putting a stop to the slander and evil-speaking of
courts? As soon build dikes against the ocean.
I admit that Guy uses no caution. They may
boast that he has wisdom ; and yet his very gayety
of heart gives a pretext for all sorts of absurd
stories which are current about him."
"Pretexts! What pretexts?" cried Robert,
subduing a strong desire of his own to smash his
<pb>
companion's head. " Are you aware that Cornelius
accused him of sorcery and witchcraft?"
" That is going too far. Nevertheless, we must
acknowledge that Guy gives some provocation to
common talk, by his eccentric habits. Does he not
ride down to Pouille wood at midnight, to visit his
haunted lodge, the terror of the neighborhood, and
to set up his telltale light in the window? And in
the evening, at his own house, he shuts himself up
in a closet with neither lock nor key, and forbids
his servants to enter, and so clear up the mystery.
In short, what can be said about it? Simply that
Guy do Fougereuse has something to conceal.
That explains all."
"If Fcugereuse has a secret, it is an honorable
secret, my lord of Maulny. Is it not a fair em-
ployment for gentlemen to spread far and wide the
gossip of the vulgar? How can suspicions cling
for an instant to a knight of noble blood, whose
allegiance cannot be called in question ? "
" Calm yourself, Villepreux. Far be it from me
to throw suspicion on the honor and good faith of
my own kinsman, the friend of my childhood! If
I am thus frank with you, it is because you are the
sole person who has sufficient influence over Guy
to draw him away from these practices which so
endanger his reputation. . . . Why that indignant
gesture? Will you never cure yourself of the
notion that the others here are like you? The
King, to you, is infallible: a friend of yours cannot
deceive. All the better, if this be so. Perhaps
<pb>
you know what Fougereuse was after last night
at Wolfram's house? . . . Though he does not
exempt you, any more than the next one, from his
teasings, I believe Guy is sincerely attached to
you: as much as he can be to any one. I have
never shared the opinion of those who look upon
him as a hypocrite and trick comedian. I know
him to be ambitious, an able diplomat, an accom-
plished courtier, but—•"
Villepreux stopped short, in the middle of the
Rue Saint Aignan. "Maulny," he said, with a
quietude which masked his passionate temper, " if
you prefer that we two should survive and reach
our homes to-night, then let us separate. Choose
your road, and I will take the contrary one. Say
not a word more! You never were so near to
death in all your life."
A few minutes later, Robert de Villepreux re-
turned alone to the palace of Fougereuse, and
sank wearily into a chair, murmuring: "I ought
never to have come back from the Holy Land!"
If it had been given to Walter to read Villepreux's
candid soul, he might have shuddered at the storm
he had created there. All who have suffered
under the errors and disillusions of life will agree
that the moment hardest to bear is not that in
which one feels the cruel blow fall, but that in
which the presentiment of it is clear and sure: the
moment when the heart, till then serene and trust-
ful, hears a whispered, Beware! or when doubt
first glides in between a man and his dearest be-
<pb>
liefs. That moment abides in memory as one of
unique anguish. Robert's nature, being generous
and lofty, gave him, by so much, the sharper tor-
ment. He blushed at his own misgivings, he
hated himself for his sceptic fears; yet he could
not escape them. lie, who would have taken his
oath before God and men that Guy was incapable
of the least disloyalty, heard the words of Maulny
echo implacably in his ears: ''Guy de Fougereuse
has something to conceal." He remembered how
his friend had evaded certain queries, and he re-
membered some curious circumstances which he
had not noticed at the time. A growing unrest
crept over his thoughts, and weighed down his
spirits; hours passed by, and he was unconscious
of their passing. Very late, Guy came home.
His friend could hear him scolding Vincent and
Lo'ic, with an unwonted severity which surprised
him.
" My fault, my fault, is it ? " grumbled the
equerry. " My lord holds me responsible, for-
sooth ! Ami supposed to dog the footsteps of a
young good-for-nothing who never knows his place,
and rides over every rule ? Was I able to foresee
that those two simpletons would try to slice each
other, in the public courtyard of the ducal palace ?
On my word, there are no children nowadays! "
" A gentleman, however young, is old enough to
resent an insult!" Lo'ic's voice was shrill with
exasperation. " I take no orders from any one, on
such a matter."
<pb>
" You will take orders from me, now and here,
Messire de Kernis," said Guy, in cold, peremptory
tones which admitted of no reply. " I commission
you to confine yourself to this house until I give
you leave to quit it; and I dispense you from all
personal service to me, until your repentance shall
have proved itself genuine."
"I repent nothing. I shall stand by what I
said, and by what I did. If I had to begin again,
I should do the same thing, and that is the long
and the short of it! "
"You heard me, Lo'ic. I will be obeyed. Go to
your room and meditate, and do not approach me
again, unless I send for you. I have pardoned a
great deal in you, but this latest folly exceeds all
bounds, and such impertinence no indulgence ought
to cover. Go."
The page went hurriedly. Guy walked down
the long corridor to his own apartment. As he
opened his door, he sighed: " There must have
been a wager on it to-night !"
Disturbed by this novel incident, Robert deter-
mined to let nothing interfere with his desire to
question his friend. He entered his room without
difficulty, and then he had a shock of surprise. It
was empty! The only evidences that Guy had
been there, were his rich cloak and his dress sword
thrown across his chair. Not knowing what to
think, and recalling Maulny's hints, Villepreux re-
treated, sadly puzzled. Lo'ic's little room, in the
tower, was next his own. Robert approached the
<pb>
door between, and knocked softly, calling the page
in an undertone. Not receiving an answer, he let
himself in, torch in hand. Lo'ic, still in his tour-
nament costume, was lying on the bed, his head
buried in his folded arms, sobbing with all the
hot hopelessness of a child unjustly punished.
Robert laid his hand gently on the boy's shoulder.
He sprang up instantly, excused himself, dried his
tears with an impatient hand, and seemed greatly
chagrined that his grief had found a spectator.
"Lo'ic, I heard it all," Villepreux began. " What
happened to your master after I left the palace ? "
" This, my lord. One of the King's pages, that
coxcomb of a Paul de Fleurenville, cast an asper-
sion upon the baron in my presence. So "—
" What did he say ? "
" He said that my master used amulets and talis-
mans to make him win in the jousts, and that he
had woven a spell around King Rene, in order to
get his confidence. Do you suppose I could abide
that? We went down into the courtyard and
drew upon each other, and Master Paul got a good
slash of my sword. Unluckily, the King's doctor,
Cornelius, whose old eyes let nothing escape them,
passed by just then, and he began shouting for
help, and crying that I was slaughtering one of
his Majesty's household. They all rushed in upon
us, and had it not been for Vincent, who dragged
me out of the scrimmage at the very first moment,
I should have been imprisoned without further
trial. And I should have liked it better. I would
<pb>
rather be buried alive in a dungeon by my master's
enemies, than to see myself disgraced by him, sim-
ply because I defended him bravely."
" And because you answered him impudently,"
Villepreux remarked.
"Ah, that is too hard on me," the page protested,
in an altered tone. " Messire Robert, I leave
you to judge. Has the baron any right to treat
me so, after all he has done forme? See! he found
me a young child, an orphan, in Brittany, left in
charge of a miserly guardian who used to send me
out into the fields to tend his sheep. He took
me away from that tyrant: I dare say he bought
me from him with good gold. He brought me to
Fougereuse, treated me as one of his family, had
me reared like his own son, became to me father,
mother, sister, brother; and now he refuses me the
privilege of drawing a blade in his defence. I, it
seems, must allow him to be lied about, and called
a sorcerer and a reprobate, without lifting my fin-
ger! Now, if it be my duty to hold my tongue
while my master is maligned, I prefer to go back
to Brittany. Why was I not left with my scamp
of a relative ? I should have no temptation to
fight in that person's quarrels."
" Be quiet, child," Villepreux answered kindly.
"This will all be cleared up. To-morrow I will
speak to Guy, and make your peace with him."
"Not that; never!" Lo'ic, whose pride had
reasserted itself, cried out with animation. li I
beseech you, most earnestly, not to come between
<pb>
us, in the hope of any reconciliation. My master
wishes my services no longer, and I shall not
impose them upon him. But whether dismissed or
not, I am able to watch his foes, and unmask them.
I can devote myself to my lord despite him, away
from him, in the shadows; so that one day he
will be forced to proclaim: ' It is Lo'ic who saved
me.' Then, perchance, he will regret having cast
off a friend who would shed his life-blood for his
sake."
The hectic fervor of the page impressed Ville-
preux, and he surmised that the reprimand which
he had received was not the only reason for it.
He was anxious to learn the true cause.
" What is all this, Lo'ic, about saving your mas-
ter despite himself ? Does some great danger men-
ace him? Do you know of any ? "
"I know what I know," Lo'ic replied laconically.
" The baron of Fougereuse may do what he likes,
and go whither he pleases: that is his own affair.
It may be that he takes pleasure in being dubbed
a magician: if so, that is his own affair too. But
morbleu ! any one who accuses him while I am there
to hear, will not be likely to repeat his words to
any second pair of ears, unless it be Satan's. I
mean to keep guard over the honor of Fouge-
reuse!" As Lo'ic ended, he swayed to and fro,
and sank down upon a seat, with a look of sudden
agony.
" My poor child ! " cried Robert; " you are
wounded. There is blood on your sleeve. Stretch
<pb>
out your arm, and let me bathe it. Why did you
not speak of it ? "
" Probably because I thought nothing about it.
A cut in the left arm, a mere scratch! Bah ! I
was awkward at it. Another time I shall take
pains to get.killed."
Robert left the boy only after he had dressed
the wound, which was not deep, and endeavored
to calm his excitement. But Lo'ic was in the
melodramatic mood, and persisted in regarding
himself as a wronged and magnanimous hero. The
next day Guy was summoned early to the cas-
tle, and was absent until afternoon. Villepreux
awaited him, in much anxiety.
" Well, Robert," the baron said, on accosting his
friend, " I find you already famous at court, and
the place divided into opposite camps, all on your
account. Cornelius is sore at having been saluted
as an intriguer, a parvenu, a contemptible crea-
ture : you did not spare him such compliments!
He has complained to the agents of King Louis,
who uphold him; he has complained to d'Anglure
and the other fops, who make common cause with
him, having been as badly treated by you as he
was himself; he complained to the good King, our
own liege lord, who sent me to soothe him. In
short, the question agitating all minds at present
seems to be: Is it expedient for the Lion to roar
anywhere outside Palestine ? One party says yea,
another nay. As for me, being too nearly con-
cerned, I remain neutral; but you have a strong
<pb>
champion in my sister Isabelle. Poor little one !
she is inconsolable not to have had an opportunity
to thank you for waging war on my detractors.
But, as a dutiful brother, I express her gratitude
for her."
" What tidings are these you bring !" exclaimed
Robert, bewildered at the unexpected results of
the affair of the preceding evening. " What!
Has that Cornelius the effrontery to complain, and
to complain to the King ? You make me regret
that I did not wring his neck."
" How could it be otherwise ? Audacity is the
path to success, and the first to appeal is the first
to win his cause. I could say nothing after that.
I did my best to exonerate you, 011 the known plea
that you come from Palestine."
"And so," said Villepreux indignantly, "it
is the aggressor who complains, it is the defen-
der who is apologized for, and it is the injured
person who holds his tongue! Where is the
right ? "
" That, my friend, is what no one worries about.
' The right! Ask Lauis XI. if he cares to know.
What rights has he over this duchy of Anjou?
Nevertheless, he will give himself no repose until
he has wrested it, willy-nilly, from the hands of his
uncle Rene. I notice that our gentle sovereign
tires of contention, and makes concession after
concession,in order to have peace. He is mistaken
if he thinks to disarm his affectionate nephew by
such compromises. Louis of France covets every-
<pb>
thing, and will not let go his hold until he has
obtained everything."
" One can have no peace with him except at the
point of the lance, as Joan the Maid said to the
Duke of Burgundy. Now, if I were the King,
I" —
"If you were king, Robert, you would have
royal theories instead of military notions. The
right, in this generation, has few supporters."
" Guy, is it indeed you who say such a thing ? "
asked Villepreux gravely. " Are you so much
changed? Must I set up as chief mourner for our
friendship over and gone ? "
"No, if you please," Fougereuse answered
quickly; "for I mean to keep it alive. My dear
Robert, you take whatever you hear in so tragic a
sense! Your Penitent Thieves have corrupted you
with their fanatical admirations and their blind
obedience. You have made them over into your
own image. But consider: I am not on their
level, having been neither a Saracen, nor a rene-
gade, nor a captive, nor anything else which en-
lists your enthusiasm. Show me, then, a little
indulgence."
"Can you give me any news of the page whom
Lo'ic hurt yesterday evening? " Robert made his
serious inquiry without lowering his eyes from the
mobile, playful face of his friend.
Guy frowned. " Forbear mentioning Lo'ic to
me. He.is a rebel, an ungovernable firebrand. I
have spoiled him: he goes too far. He deserved
<pb>
a severe lesson, and he has received it. Do not
take his part."
" You are severe. He was acting in your be-
half. I do not see why a naughty prick of the
sword " —
" If it had been only a prick of the sword! But
it was a prick of the tongue as well, and one past
cure. . . . Are you astonished? I warrant Lo'ic does
not brag of it. One of the King's pages, repeating,
like a parrot, the gossip of the day, accuses me of
having bewitched his Majesty, in order to win and
retain his favor. And my discreet lad finds noth-
ing better to do than to respond, with the boldness
quite characteristic of him : ' You are hard put to
it, my poor Fleurenville, if you hope to persuade
us that one has to be a sorcerer, before he can over-
rule your master's mind! If it were King Louis,
now, it would be quite otherwise.' "
"The madcap! The little fool!" cried Ville-
preux. " His anger must have made him forget
himself."
" Anyhow, it came off, did it not, in plain hear-
ing of the royal household ; of pages, equerries,
guards of the palace, and all the rest? Of course
the sarcasm will be laid to me. A master of the
house is always measured by the language his sub-
ordinates use."
"And as King Rene is extremely anxious to
seem possessed of the qualities he lacks, it will
offend him mortally," Robert continued.
" You have hit it precisely. Had Lo'ic only
<pb>
taxed his Majesty with avarice, or perfidy, or igno-
rance, my royal master would have laughed at it;
but a hint that he is weak and indecisive can never
be forgiven. After all, it is truly our gracious
liege's only fault: this too easy good-nature.
One could nowhere find a heart more generous, a
more upright soul, a more cultivated intellect,
more thorough goodness of character. It pains me
deeply to see him struck by a dart aimed from
my threshold, though not by my hand. Well, the
thing is done! I must try to atone for it as I
can."
" I sympathize with your trouble, Guy; but I
must say, I do not consider Lo'ic very guilty. How
can you expect that child, whose one affection is
for you, to hear you abused without protesting,
when I myself " —
"It is true you cannot act impartially, Ville-
preux," answered Guy, with gayety; "and I read
it in your face that you are not over and above
pleased with me. You find me affable with my
enemies, rude with my friends, thankless to my de-
fenders, and lenient to my detractors. You have
a grudge against me for interfering with you yes-
terday, just as you were on the point of impaling
half a dozen striplings; and your blood boils at
this moment to hear me laugh and jest. You say
to yourself that I have softened, degenerated ; that
the court has vitiated my heart and mind ; that the
chase for pleasure is my sole occupation in life,
and that I imperil the salvation of my soul. Do
<pb>
you not think me a bit of a sorcerer, yourself ?
Come, own it."
"God forbid, Guy! I do not see how you can
speak so lightly of such grave matters. In the
funeral pile of Giles de Retz, the ashes yet smoul-
der, and such rumors as those of yesterday may
yet rekindle them."
"Receive my thanks for the comparison with
that strangle! of little children ! Have I tried to
rival him? You humiliate me indeed, Villepreux,
when you set Bluebeard's name over against that
of your best friend. Fie upon you! Ah, you
shake your head. Then let us be calmer. One
must be Robert the Lion, to believe that any one
topic can hold the interest of the court of Anjou
for two consecutive days. Every morrow's news
blots out the memory of the news of the evening
before. After having shuddered at the idea of
Guy de Fougereuse dealing in the Black Art, they
will seek the next sensation in the morality of
The Worldly Man, which is to be given this week.
It is just what you will approve, Sir Ascetic; and
I will have one of the front seats set by for you, at
the side of my cousin Walter de Maulny, who will
explain to you all the local allusions."
"I object to my proposed neighbor," said Robert
fiercely. "If you inflict him upon me, and there
should be consequences, you are responsible. Have
you sworn to drive me to something desperate,
Guy ?"
" There: what a puzzling, inconsistent fellow you
<pb>
are ! You bring home from the ends of the earth
a tribe of reformed brigands, on whom you lavish
infinite kindness and forbearance; yet you cannot
endure Maulny, who, after all, has nothing in his
disfavor except that he has squandered his patri-
mony. Frankly, I must ask you to let me place
my cousin on a different plane from that of your
jailbirds."
"I, too, should put him on a different plane.
My thieves are on the right side of the Cross,
while Maulny dwells always on the other side,
with a mighty small chance of conversion. There
is no more arrant trickster in this world than your
cousin Walter. As a choice between thief and
thief, I prefer the penitent sort to the impenitent! "
"You are unjust towards Maulny, Villepreux.
He has been embittered by his failure in life, or
discouraged by the reverses of fortune: experi-
ences such as his do not sweeten one's disposition.
You never liked him, and you are too hard upon
him. But remember how fate has always gone
against him, until now he is on the very brink of
ruin. I realize what you would add : that Walter
has no love for me. Would it not rather be a mar-
vel, Robert, if he liked ine ever so little? I have
been, at every turn, his rival, and, without mean-
ing it, his successful rival. I have unconsciously
blocked his way to preferment, and distanced him
in the King's favor; besides, I have refused him
my sister's hand, and her dowry. His resentment
is natural enough. I know not" —
<pb>
" Isabelle's hand!" literally roared Villepreux, as
he sprang straight up. " The felon! The traitor!
How dared he ? "
"And why not? Walter's own birth is as noble.
Isabelle's dowry would have allowed him to re-pur-
chase Maulny. The alliance commended itself to
a great many members of my family. I would not
consent to it, because Isabelle's happiness must be
confided to no man in whom I have not absolute
trust. Still, there is no cause to cry felony and
treachery. If you were in Walter's place, would
you not act in the same way ?"
" Never ! " Villepreux indignantly answered.
" It is infamous! "
"Infamous, is it, to sue for the honor of becom-
ing my brother-in-law? My poor, dear Robert, it
is certain that the atmosphere of Palestine " —
"Guy, you are pretending to misunderstand me.
The infamy would be to marry an angel like Isa-
belle to a being like Maulny ! Even to name them
together is sacrilege."
" I told you I would not hear of it. Do not
blaze up so ! It makes dealings with a caged Lion
extra difficult. Go and exhort your Penitent
Thieves: it will quiet you."
"Guy, I shall not go, nor exhort my Penitent
Thieves," replied Villepreux, slowly mastering
Ins temper. " I exact of you, for the sake of our
sworn friendship, an honest explanation. What
part am I expected to play here ? Am I a stuffed
figure in the games, a butt for every man's lance ?
<pb>
Do you imagine you can blind me, as if I were a
child, by your perpetual small talk, and your affec-
tation of frivolity ? I have not lost (and I thank
God for it) my skill to read you through ; and I
know you are, at bottom, the same old noble heart.
But this court-like trifling is worthy neither of
you nor of me. I challenge you, Guy de Fouge-
reuse, to throw your mask aside, and at last to let
me see your face. I weary of being maltreated by
my dearest friend, one who will always be that,
whatever fault I have to find with him."
The baron listened without interrupting, and
in an attitude of great seriousness. His eyes fell
gradually under that steady, direct glance which
sought to penetrate his soul, and his gay, careless
expression changed to one of ever-deepening grav-
ity. Another man sat there: Guy, unknown to
himself, was obeying Villepreux, was showing
him his true lineaments, without disguise. It
would have been impossible for tiny spectator not
to have been struck just then by the contrast
between the two. Villepreux's uncommon stat-
ure, his austere garb, the firm lines of his mouth
and cheek, his dominant air, as of a chief accus-
tomed to command, made the other appear shorter
and frailer than he really was; and Fougereuse,
with his graceful, well-turned figure, in his doub-
let of bright blue satin, with his delicate smile,
his blond hair, his youthful look, his quick speech
and gesture, was like a mere boy beside a warrior.
Yet the dignity and nobility of his whole person
<pb>
were such that they bred respect in his most boor-
ish inferior, as well as in his most critical equal.
Villepreux, on his part, acknowledged the power
of what he called " Guy's grand air." After a
short silence, Guy raised his head and met his
friend's eyes.
" What fault have I committed against you,
Robert?" he asked gently. "Tell me: and if I
have given offence, I shall be eager to repair it."
" What fault against me, Guy ? This : that you
withhold your confidence from a brother who has
nothing apart from you; that you treat me like a
babe whom one hushes at bedtime with stories,
or entertains by day with words, words, words;
that I have to stand by and behold you running
light-heartedly into imminent danger, and risking
your good name, not to speak of your position and
fortune, with the recklessness of a young blade
who will take no advice. Has our ancient prom-
ise of fealty to each other come to this, that I
must fold my arms and close my ears, when your
enemies are about you? Is it my duty, in this
battle, never to succor you ? I may have been a
very, very long time in Palestine; but I have not
come back so deaf and so blind that I can take
calumny for a proof of personal interest, the en-
viers of a person for his loving friends, nor Walter
de Maulny for a good man."
Fougereuse smiled and nodded his head; but
Villepreux was unwilling to let him speak.
" Listen," he said, laying his heavy hand on his
<pb>
comrade's arm, " I shall set you an example of can-
dor which I trust you will follow." And lean-
ing towards Guy, lowering his voice so that no
one else could overhear him, he related to him, in
detail, all that he had witnessed or apprehended
since the previous evening. He omitted no one
circumstance: neither the conversation at the ball,
the accusations of Cornelius, the stinging asper-
sions of Maulny, Lo'ic's despairing state and his
reference to undiscovered perils, nor even the
narrator's own visit to Guy's chamber, when he
perceived it to be empty, a few seconds after Guy
had been heard to enter it.
Fougereuse was attentive, but not impressed.
At the last specification he shrugged his shoulders.
" How like you that is, my big Lion ! You must
have adventures at any price. Not finding me in,
you conclude that I had gone to join some witches
at their orgies, or to race through the city streets
in the form of a werewolf! Or I have the secret
art of making myself invisible, have I not? How
should I be able to satisfy you on this point, when
for my own part, I hardly comprehend for what
the populace are ready to arraign me? They
strike hard enough, plague upon it! What with
nocturnal travels, necromancy, murders in effigy,
and dark deeds done in mysterious cubby-holes
which have neither lock nor key, I should have
to be two men to have achieved the half of it!
Now I see nothing worth notice in all this, except
Walter's malice. He is evidently seeking to es-
<pb>
tablish bad blood between us, and to estrange us;
and here you are mistrusting me already! Be
sure, too, that he has turned Lo'ic's head. In re-
gard to that child, if you would do me a service,
take him with you to Villepreux, and keep him
awhile. His independent nature needs some firm
discipline. You see, I could not, in decency,
allow him to appear at court again, after his esca-
pade of yesterday."
" As for taking Lo'ic, I will do it gladly. But
you try my patience, Guy. Have you nothing
else to say to me ? "
"Nothing, Robert, save that I thank you for
having forewarned me. That is the act of a true
friend."
Villepreux had a thrill of vexation. He went
close to the baron, put a hand on his either shoul-
der, and looked at him, face to face. "Have you
no shame, that you treat me thus ? " he said, in a
bitter and mournful tone which startled Fouge-
reuse. "Am I your dupe ? I see it all now, Guy.
Walter was no liar: you have something to con-
ceal."
"Yes, Robert," was the grave reply, "I have
something to concoal. Do not seek to discover it."
"Very well." Robert turned away,in wounded
pride. He advanced several steps towards the
door, but a hand closed around his own. and re-
tained it; and the sight of Guy's pleading eyes
softened his rising anger. "Let me go," he con-
tinued. " You do not know what I have to bear.
<pb>
Have you altered so, within two years, that you
cannot pity a friend ? Can you not open your
heart to me yet ? "
"Robert, I ask your pardon," replied Fouge-
reuse, with sadness and tenderness. "I did what
I could to postpone this moment, and to evade ex-
planations. I wished to spare j-ou the chagrin of
it. Your friendship is my chief treasure: I could
not bear the thought of forfeiting it. I could
brave the opinion of the court, of the whole world,
but I could not bear to have you suspect me. Yet
let me unbosom myself, and stake my hopes upon
your generosity. As I admitted to you, I have a
secret, and a secret which no one, not even you,
ought to know before the allotted hour. I have
sworn to keep it, and I must observe my vow. I
will say to you only that my conscience is clean,
that there is no stain on my shield. The test of
our affection is at hand. I have not changed to-
wards you, Robert: I never ceased to love you and
believe in you. Were I guilty of a crime, I should
confess it to you by choice; were I cast off by
every one else, I should confidently claim shelter
from you. And to-day I ask you to give me your
blind credence. Are you fond enough of me to
grant it? Do you esteem me enough to trust me,
notwithstanding all evidence against me ? Could
you consent to follow me without question or
debate, and be without resentment when matters
become more and more entangled, and I shall be
powerless to right them in your eyes ? If you will
<pb>
go with me on this new track, you must walk in
darkness. It would be madness to ask such al-
legiance from another man: but you, Villepreux,
are equal to it, equal to that heroic exercise of
faith in humankind. In case you feel you can-
not accord it to me, let us part. Leave me to my
fate. I can endure to suffer alone; I shall never
be so unjust as to hold a grudge against you.
Now give me your verdict. I am at your mercy."
With an impulsive motion, Villepreux stretched
out his loyal hand to his friend. " I have faith in
you, Guy; I would follow you to the ends of the
earth. Keep your secret, and keep your resolu-
tion: I mean to respect both. Here is my hand,
offered frankly, as on the dny of our reconcilia-
tion long ago. . . . All the same, confound your
reticence and your everlasting circumlocutions!
Could you not have begun by saying this, instead
of tormenting me so ? I shall have hard work to
forgive you for my last twenty-four hours."
Guy came towards him with open arms. A fra-
ternal embrace sealed their mutual exoneration for
the past, and their promise for the time to be.
So the time wore on in peace. Not that Robert
lacked a cause of disquietude. Although he was
certain of the honorable nature of Guy's secret, he
was ill at ease in regard to its accompanying cir-
cumstances. The rumors at court grew in volume
and in importance, clinging always to the selfsame
subject, and varying only in their manifestations.
Maulny, who had allied himself promptly with
<pb>
Cornelius, beheld his own influence on the increase.
A little group began to gather about him. It was
composed of those interested for Louis XL, those
jealous of Fougereuse, certain aspiring wretches
who had all to gain and nothing to lose, and a few
prim old ladies with long tongues, easily disedi-
fied, and quick to bewail the sins of some one else.
" My dear," said the marchioness of Thibault
to the dowager-duchess of Bouchemaine, " I have
always deplored, in that young Fougereuse,his ex-
cessive frivolity and his zest for worldly pastimes;
but I never dreamed they would lead him so early
to destruction. How melancholy it is to think that
our lord the King should ever have given his
affection to such an impostor! For that matter,
the whole Fougereuse family are full of pride and
hypocrisy. The late baron and his spouse " —
" That goose! Mention her not to me," inter-
rupted Madame de Bouchemaine. " When she
came to court, you would think nothing existed
except for her benefit. If her son be vain and
conceited, we know from whom he gets his quali-
ties. And that little Lsabelle seems to me to be
taking after her mother, too. It is enough to
make one tremble for one's own salvation, cousin,
when one sees what the unchecked love of idle
pleasure can lead to. May the saints keep us from
it! To think that all those splendid coaches and
horses are gifts from the Devil! " And the two
good Christians crossed themselves in holy horror,
and went off to whisper from ear to ear the They
<pb>
say and the It looks as though, which are the final
evidence in the world of tittle-tattle.
Little by little the young aristocrats, who were
at first among Fougereuse's allies, went over to
the other side: for it was agreeable to disparage
one whom they had tried in vain to excel. What
a rare morsel for human malice to fall upon, even
in our own day, is a spotless reputation ! Aristides
was ostracized by men who were tired of hearing
him named the Just. So with Fougereuse. Slan-
der did her best to destroy him, because society
was tired of seeing him always happy. A loss or
discomfort brought into his private life, a smirch
set upon his character, was a cause of public tri-
umph. As soon as hostility to him became fash-
ionable, the crowd of courtiers abandoned him in
a body, after the irrational, sheep-like instinct of
crowds, who follow their ringleader. Doubts then
hardened into certitude, report changed to con-
firmation, exaggerations set up for simple fact, and
lies announced themselves as true and authentic,
before any one could tell how it happened. Eight
days after the first hint of the charge, it was duly
and fully understood that the baron Guy de Fou-
gereuse practised magic; and woe be unto him
who would dispute it! "Everybody says so," was
urged upon the incredulous, and to that argument
they had to submit. Had the Pope himself taken
pains to deny the aspersion, there would have been
a general chorus: " But, Holy Father! what are
you dreaming of? Everybody says so." And no
<pb>
censure or excommunication launched against
" Everybody " would have abated the ardor of his
disciples.
King Rene, meanwhile, had not abandoned
Fougereuse. He had shut his ears, in the begin-
ning, to the chatter around him. But two things
succeeded in introducing distrust into his generous
mind: one was the able, crafty, persistent attitude
of Walter de Maulny, who conducted his campaign
with finished art; the other was the importunity of
Cornelius, who could never forgive Guy for having
befriended Antonio Blandini. The King's rela-
tions with his favorite became less whole-hearted,
and eventually touched with a new coldness. The
young baron eluded or avoided the avowals which
he was tacitly invited to make, and the ill success
of these appeals was an irritating matter to Rene
of Anjou. Moreover, the imprudent taunt which
Lo'ic had flung at Fleurenville had been carried
to the royal ears. Guy was not held responsible,
and yet it had the unhappy effect of leading the
King to ask himself whether Guy's feudal rever-
ence was strong enough to make him always spare
his sovereign, when the mocking mood came upon
him. Thus the strained situation lasted from week
to week, and every hour widened the abyss of dis-
grace into which it seemed that Guy must inevi-
tably fall.
By the side of his friend stood Villepreux, faith-
ful to him as his sword, steadfastly devoted, a firm
believer, absolutely docile to his instructions. He
<pb>
had agreed to press on in darkness, and he was
scrupulously mindful of it. He could, in truth,
have repeated the words of Saint Peter to Our
Saviour: " Though all shall be scandalized in thee,
yet not I!" The patience and moderation ex-
acted by Guy from his impetuous champion were
difficult to observe ; but the Lion knew how to
curb his natural fury, and yet keep his justice-lov-
ing arm ready to strike in behalf of the oppressed.
As to Fougereuse himself, his conduct was a
source of general wonder. Ever animated, smil-
ing, serene, he took his trial as a matter of course,
and examined all its bearings with a fine indiffer-
ence. He seemed to live in a conscious scorn of
danger, deaf to threat or prophecy, unconcerned
at his own defeat, and perfectly heedless of public
opinion. This last trait was exasperating beyond
any of the others. He unravelled intrigues, lis-
tened to accusations, and let every man say and
do as he liked, without offering a single protest or
denial. No one could run to ruin more merrily,
or at a more even pace! Villepreux also was
constrained to notice it.
" You are a living enigma," he said once to his
friend. "If your object be not to retain the
King's favor, why do you remain with him ?
Why not be free, and hunt deer again in the
woods about Fougereuse ? "
"Why, Robert? First, because since it was
my sovereign who called me into his service, it
becomes my duty not to desert him before he sig-
<pb>
nifies to me that he needs me no longer. I shall
never, of my own choice, expose him to the coun-
sels of Maulny, and of those lost souls who belong
to King Louis. Discredited as I am, I am useful
to him yet. I need not recall to you something
in the Chanson de Roland: —
' To suffer for one's liege lord is good:
For him, be heat and cold withstood ;
For him be given my flesh, my blood.'
Rather will I sigh, like jrour Ibrahim, 'Allah
Kerim!' which is, as I understand, ' God hath
written it.'"
" Excellent, Guy! But Ibrahim was quoting
the Koran, not the Gospel."
" Well, the Gospel covers it: ' Sufficient to the
day is the evil thereof.' And again, what would
you have me do ? Up to this, my will has med-
dled very little with the trend of my life. I have
clung to God's hand, going whither it led me, or
staying where it would have me stay, docile to
that directing. I leave it to Him to achieve my
destiny. I did not seek for the post I occupy;
and I shall not seek for another. A soldier does
not pick and choose: he obeys. His captain says
to him: ' Go, and he goeth; come, and he cometh;
do this, and he doeth it.' There, Robert, is all
my statecraft. Now you know why I remain at
court." Villepreux pressed Guy's hand in si-
lence. His knightly and religious soul understood
a language which was its own also.
<pb>
But another heart, affectionate, delicate, and
pure, had to suffer without consolation or assur-
ance. Isabelle de Fougereuse was the real victim
of the envenomed shafts showered on her brother.
The sweet face was overcast, and the dear blue
eyes filled very often with tears. She fled from
society to quiet places; she passed every free
moment at prayers in the chapel, and her fingers
were ever upon the beads of her rosary. Her com-
panions pitied her, inasmuch as she was the sister
of the godless Fougereuse; but their pity did not
so far incommode them that they felt obliged to
suppress an epigram, or a bit of personal news. In
their conscienceless cruelty, they failed to see that
they were martyring this poor child, no longer safe
from the world's spite behind the gratings of her
cloister.
At the town-house of Fougereuse, general un-
easiness reigned. Vincent, morose and taciturn,
spoke now, when he spoke at all, in monosyllables,
and seemed ever on the defensive against an
imaginary foe. Loic, whose wound was healing,
was very intractable, and kept sullenly to his
dark mood. Sometimes in open revolt against
every one near him, sometimes plunged in fierce
melancholy, unwilling to walk a step by the side
of his master, whom he scarcely seemed to know,
the once merry page was hardly to be identified
as the same Loic.
" Villepreux," said Guy on coming home one
evening, " I beg of you to advise your protSgS to
<pb>
be more prudent about it when he sets out to dis-
obey. I have just seen him outside, though he
slid away adroitly at his first glimpse of me. You
can fancy that I am not disposed to tolerate such a
breach of my formal orders. Here is a scapegrace
whom the King thinks is lying half dead from
young Fleurenville's sword-thrust; and lo! he
pervades the streets of Angers, and has access to
them by every door, obvious or otherwise, in this
house. A stop must be put to it. If I should
catch Loi'c again, I shall send him down to
Fougereuse at once, under Vincent's charge."
Robert undertook to reprimand the lad. At
the first word he was interrupted. " You will
excuse me, sir knight, for saying so, but you are
judging me without understanding the case. If I
act as I do, it is for the baron's good, and not
without excellent reason."
" Hey I my mad little Breton! do you pretend
that playing truant is a means to ' safeguard the
honor of Fougereuse ' ? Your whims and freaks
are incomprehensible."
" I am not playing truant," the page answered
vehemently, cut to the quick at being treated like
a child. " I am baffling spies ! That is my busi-
ness, messire. The baron is always awaited, every
night, by an individual who hides himself in an
angle of the wall. One fine evening I set forth
by way of the narrow gate in the garden, draping
my cloak about me in just my lord's own fashion.
You know we are the same height. Well, the
<pb>
rascal was taken in by it, and he followed me like
my shadow wherever I went. Since then I give
him a walk time after time, and I show him con-
siderable territory, too. You cannot tire him out;
and nothing discourages him. I have led him
into the turbulent part of the town, lost him in
the passage-ways, misled him among alleys, got
him into the round-house. I once kept him ra-
cing for miles along the river, when I took the
notion to seize a boat and have a row. He is
raging for his prey, he is! During these proceed-
ings, the baron is free to travel where he pleases,
unobserved. My master can snub me, but he can-
not hinder me from getting killed in his stead if
I choose; and it is exactly what I do choose
at present."
When Guy was informed by his friend of this
eccentric proof of attachment, he burst out laugh-
ing. " One never, never knows what to expect
with that imp of a Lo'ic. Who could have fore-
seen such a contrivance? I swear, I would give
something to watch the grotesque chase on the
part of a cheated spy, and that young hobgoblin
of a page leading him a march. But it is a dan-
gerous game: it must come to an end instantly."
"I have tried to reorganize it,'' replied Ville-
preux. "My Penitent Thieves will identify and
arrest the pursuer. As to the page, my eloquence is
thrown away on him. He is likely to break some-
body's head, or get his own broken, and that shortly.
Can you not lay by your severity towards him ? "
<pb>
" Dear old Lion, he has worked upon your feel-
ings ! I cannot very well go to him, and say,
' Lo'ic, do me the charity to forget and forgive
your misdeeds.' Extract from that hardened rebel
one word of remorse, and I will absolve him in all
haste. I dislike to be stern; and I am weary at
seeing around me only hostile faces."
A day had been long fixed upon for a hunt in
the forest of Avrille. The horns of the outriders,
the baying of dogs, the noise and stir of the
start, the galloping horses, carrying squires and
dames into the openings of the yellowing wood over
a carpet of fallen leaves, drove dull care away, and
blotted out the present hour in the intoxication of
free motion in the open air. Isabelle de Fouge-
reuse had suffered her vivacious companions to pass
her by; they pressed on, inhaling the fresh keen
breeze, and eager to enjoy the excitement of the
chase. But she, guiding her palfrey into a lonely
path, ended by throwing the bridle over the neck
of the gentle and intelligent animal. Lost in
thought, she began to form a fervent prayer.
Down her blanched cheeks ran silent tears, which
she sought neither to repress nor to conceal. God,
the Virgin Mother in Heaven, and the angles,—
were they the only witnesses of her sisterly sor-
row? At the foot of the path, under the shade of
giant oaks, arose a Cross over against a hermitage.
Isabelle, who turned her horse towards this solitary
<pb>
retreat, came abruptly upon the stone steps worn
by the feet and the knees of pious .pilgrims. As
she looked around in hesitation, to find some
object which should help her in dismounting, the
thump of hoofs struck the soft moss, and a cavalier
spurred into the glade. Isabelle, in her surprise,
had made a slight movement as if to withdraw;
but on recognizing Robert de Villepreux, kept her
saddle, and gave the new-comer a welcoming smile.
" It is a friend, Lady Isabelle!" said Villepreux,
standing bareheaded, with respectful courtesy.
"It is indeed," answered Isabelle, bowing grace-
fully, "a fast and faithful friend; and I am glad
of this chance to thank him for his noble zeal
for my brother. May Heaven reward you, sir
knight!"
" There is nothing to thank me for, for Guy is
my brother too. Did I not swear, when we be-
came friends, to defend his honor as if it were my
own ? You find me on a pilgrimage to Our Lady
of Pity, and looking for the good hermit, who will
throw the chapel open. Would it please you to
visit it, and offer up a prayer ? "
" I came with that very intention, Messire
Robert," replied the girl, accepting Villepreux's
aid as she alighted on the ground. " Our Lady
can assist us in this dark hour, and I have a firm
hope that she will do so."
"She is one who never fails, daughter," said a
grave voice near the Cross. " No votary of hers
goes away with a heart unsatisfied."
<pb>
Isabelle and Robert turned about, and perceived,
at the foot of the Calvary, a venerable man with a
long white beard, dressed in a brown robe, and
leaning on a knotty stick. Between his fingers he
held a large well-worn rosary, and on his breast
was a wooden crucifix of rude workmanship.
" Peace be to you, my children!" he said, in
response to the deferent greeting of the young
people. "What would you ask of Our Lady of
Pity, and of me her servant ? "
" Of Our Lady, her protection for a being very
dear to us both," answered llobert. " And of her
servant, some good advice."
" Father, pray for an innocent person whose life
and reputation are at stake, and who is left to
suffer alone," murmured Isabelle. " Pray for my
brother, Guy de Fougereuse."
The solitary opened the door of the rustic ora-
tory. "Our Lady's image is here, my daughter.
Enter, and weep and pray in peace at her feet.
And you, my son, stay a moment with me. Were
you not a pilgrim in the Holy Land, and did I not
meet you there ? "
Villepreux looked keenly at him. " To be
sure! " he cried. " Was it not you, Father, who
baptized my bandit of an Ibrahim in mid-desert,
using the very last drops of water you had in your
flask? Blessed be God, who brings us again
together! "
The hermit smiled, and seating himself on the
steps of the Cross, he motioned Villepreux to take
<pb>
his place beside him. " Now tell me, my son, in
what way I can give you counsel." And between
him and the knight began a conversation carried
on in a low tone, which was almost as confidential
as a confession.
During this time, Isabelle, prostrate before the
shrine of Our Lady of Pity, prayed with fervor.
An air of faith and sincerity pervaded the humble
sanctuary, hung with the votive offerings of the
poor, and with no adornment save the boughs of
green holly. The heart of the young girl, aching
from too long repression, filled with hope and
comfort in the felt presence of the Mother of the
Afflicted, whom the Church salutes as " our life,
our comfort, and our hope " in Christ. When she
raised her eyes, Robert de Villepreux was kneeling
beside her, his forehead bent to the ground: a pic-
ture of that manly piety which had not then ceased
to burn in knightly breasts. Next to his bowed
figure was the good hermit's, and there fell over
his cheeks the thin hair whitened in many a holy
vigil.
"I beg you to offer this, in my name, to Our
Lady's chapel," Isabelle said afterwards, loosening
from her wrist a bracelet of ornate gold, and hand-
ing it to the old man. "I promise, if my petition
be heard, to crown this statue with a diadem of all
my jewels. Be you the witness of the promise,
Father."
"I have one also to make," added Villepreux.
"If my friend be delivered from his present diffi-
<pb>
culties, I vow to Our Lady that I will dedicate to
her all my Penitent Thieves."
"What is this you say, Messire Robert?" ex-
claimed Isabelle, surprised and amused at the .
singular proffer.
" The reverend Father understands, my lad}7.
I have a cure of souls I Here is a troop of men
whom I redeemed from slavery, or cut off from
sin: I am responsible for them before God. So
long as we were among the Moslems, there was
enough fighting to keep them busy and out of
mischief. But it will never do to let them pick a
quarrel with the Christians of France. The King
would not accept them for soldiery; then I wished
some Abbey to employ them; but the trouble is
that they will obey no living creature save myself!
Now I shall pledge their service to Our Lady of
Pity. They will build her chapel 011 my estate,
with a hospice for pilgrims, travellers, and the sick.
They will protect the weak, and guard the neigh-
boring hamlets from robbery and pillage. They
will provide an escort for strangers, to guide them
across the country, and preserve them from mishap,
like the archangel Raphael befriending the son of
Tobias. It will be their salvation, and it will pro-
mote the common good. Our Lady will assist
Guy de Fougereuse, and I shall attend promptly
to the rest, and spare no pains to make a perfect
work of it."
"An excellent inspiration, my dear son," said
the monk earnestly, "and I bless it in the name of
<pb>
the Lord. Hope and believe. It maybe that yon
will see the realization of your dream sooner than
you think, and find more helpers than you look
for. Question me not; but leave me now, and
may Heaven protect you ! "
A little later Robert and Isabelle, having de-
parted from the hermitage, were ambling through
the forest. They heard the peal of the horns and
the tally-ho ; and about them in the autumn wind
eddied the golden leaves, which smothered on the
ground the even beat of their horses' hoofs. Isa-
belle was pensive yet, but her winsome face had
taken on a new serenity. Prayer, and the loyal
constancy of Villepreux, had strengthened her
heart. Between the Lion and Guy's sister was a
tender bond, formed in the latter's early childhood ;
and after a separation of some years, she had found
in him again the protector of long ago. Though
he had an austere manner, even as a boy, his ear
was always attentive to her little voice, and the
young inflexible will knew not how to refuse any
desire of hers. Isabelle was the sort of person
whose nature disarmed the harshness of human-
kind. The poacher, the rebel, the criminal con-
demned to the gallows, were sure to obtain some
degree of pardon,should the sweet lady of Fouge-
reuse intercede for him. A popular saying, then
more than a century old, ran thus : —
" No Fougereuse ye find
Unmerciful, unkind.
<pb>
The Villepreux has a soul
Still generous, great, and whole."
And at no time was it better borne out. The
Fougereuse gentleness attained in Guy a height of
passionate consideration for others, and of Chris-
tian forgiveness; and the "great and whole"
spirit of Villepreux stood forth in Robert's heroic
fidelity to the pact he had made with one descended
from the enemies of his race. His vow to Our
Lady of Pity, though it stirred Isabelle's sense of
humor, brought the tears to her eyes, and flooded
the very depth of her heart with thankfulness.
For she knew how attached to his men was the
leader of the Penitent Thieves, and how utterly
devoted they were to him. To break the associa-
tion formed in the Holy Land, to sever himself
from his own soldiers, and the glory they reflected
upon their captain's name,—was it not the su-
preme sacrifice for Robert to make ? Was he not
giving up, for the weal of Fougereuse, what he
held dearest on earth ?
The young damsel and the knight rode towards
the hunting-party, and were in sound of their
joyous voices. As they advanced, a royal page,
bareheaded, bewildered, mounted on a swift
courser covered with foam, appeared behind them
on the path, and dashed between Isabelle and
Robert, crying: "Give way! the King is dying! "
Stricken with distress and horror, they spurred
their horses on, reached the clearing, and found
before them a scene of indescribable grief and
<pb>
confusion. Ren6 of Anjou was stretched upon the
sod, motionless and senseless. The Queen, Joan,
who was weeping, busied herself vainly to arouse
her husband. Fougereuse held him in his arms,
assisted by several gentlemen ; Cornelius was ten-
dering every possible medical aid. There was
great disorder on all sides, much loud lamenting,
calling, running hither and thither. The rumor
of foul play was in the air: no one knew with
whom it had originated.
" Stand back, Isabelle ! " commanded Maulny,
at sight of his cousin. Approaching Villepreux,
he added in low tones, " The King lost conscious-
ness, after having drained a glass of wine offered
by Fougereuse."
Isabelle started, and grew very pale. Robert
leaped from his saddle, and rushed into the crowd.
A commotion arose in the little group around
Rene". Cornelius said a few decisive words in an
undertone ; Guy was pushed aside ; the seneschal
Beauvau, who had been leaning over the lifeless
sovereign, stood up, an avenging figure.
"The King is dying, gentlemen," he announced
solemnly, "and he is dying of poison. Treason
has done this. Guards, arrest at once the baron
Guy de Fougereuse ! "
Had a thunderbolt fallen upon Guy, it could
scarcely have affected him so much. His face
changed color. He flung out his arms as if to
resist the accusation, and he cried in a powerful
voice:
<pb>
" I swear to God that so terrible a crime never
entered into my thoughts. Though I submit to-
day, to-morrow I shall appeal to the royal justice."
His protestation was received with icy hostility.
Villepreux, who had reached his friend, seized his
left hand, and faced the seneschal. " I would have
you know, Philip de Beauvau, that while I stand
here living, that order will not be carried out. You
commit an infamy ! "
" I am but doing my duty. Baron de Fouge-
reuse, yield up your sword."
Villepreux strode forward menacingly, but Guy
deterred him with a sign. Then he handed his
sword, in silence, to the captain of the guard, and
suffered himself to be led unresistingly away. He
saw his sister fall into the arms of some court
ladies. His only farewell to .Robert was: " Care
for Isabelle."
" To the tower!" commanded the seneschal.
"You will answer to me with your lives for the
prisoner's safety."
But Walter de Maulny's lips were wreathed in
a victorious smile as he said to himself: "At last,
at last! "
<pb>
CHAPTER III.
THE PRISONER.
" ' He dies to-day,' said the jailer grim,
Whilst a tear was in his eye:
' But why should I feel so grieved for him?
Sure, I've seen many die!
' He looked so mild, with his pale, pale face,
And he spoke in so kind a way,
That my old breast heaved with a smothering feel,
And I knew not what to say.' "
The Ballad of Emmet's Death.
GUY DE FOUGEREUSE was imprisoned in a tower
which rose over against the dungeons for convicts,
and looked down upon the Maine. A bed of
straw, a stone table, one rude stool, a pitcher of
water, and the scant prison fare, became the por-
tion of the man who was but now the favorite of
fortune and the King. A ray of sunlight could
scarcely reach him, for the only openings were a few
narrow loopholes cut in a wall twelve feet thick.
No living creature entered there, except a clumsy,
morose jailer, very sparing of speech, from whom
Guy with difficult}' wrung the one word of news
he wished for: "King Rene" is not dead." A
mournful silence reigned in those dark precincts,
</div>
<pb>
<div id="the prisoner" code="2" wordcount="20376">
impenetrated by any sound from without. The
captive's one diversion was to place himself against
a loophole and gaze upon a patch of blue sky, or
a silver line of water flowing by the foot of the
keep. Escape was impossible: it was folly to
dream of it. Guy knew he could go forth from
that lofty cell only to death or to liberty with
honor; and the latter alternative was less than
probable. He knew whither the accusation of
poisoning and of high treason, and the suspicion
of sorcery, were likely to lead him: to the scaf-
fold or the stake; to the rack ; to deposition from
knighthood ; to public shame for him and his ; to
an everlasting stigma on an immaculate name.
He knew: and in his long hours of meditation he
confronted and measured the horrible perspective
of a cruel, ignominious end. Yet no fear came to
trouble that brave, calm spirit. Danger did not
abate his courage, nor tribulation weaken the faith
of the noble Christian whose trust was in God
alone. In his confinement,he maintained the very
same sweet dignity and good cheer, the same even-
ness of mind and temper, which marked him in his
happier days. The rigors of his captivity increased,
nevertheless, and the glimmer of human hope les-
sened and faded away. Guy had been left free,
at first, from shackles. But on the morrow of his
incarceration, the jailer received orders to chain
his hands and feet, like those of any common crim-
inal.
" They might have spared me that!" Fougereuse
<pb>
could not help saying, when he was apprised of
these orders. Then, rising resignedly, he added,
" Our Lord Himself was bound as a malefactor.
' Tfte servant is not greater than the master.1 Carry
out your instructions, Artauld."
Leon Artauld, the jailer, obeyed without a word,
but he went away full of admiration for his pris-
oner. " I never saw onjs of that sort before!" he
exclaimed that evening, to his assistants. " The
others rebel, shout, and curse, or else they whim-
per,'and give in like hares. Nothing seems to
move him. He took to wearing those irons as
quietly as if it were a new doublet I had brought
him to try on. ' I thank you, Artauld,' he said to
me, when it was over. I could not answer him.
Be sure he is either a great magician or a great
saint."
The next day, while Guy was profiting by his
modicum of the sunset light to read a page further
in the little book of Psalms which was always
about him, Artauld came in, shaking his bunch of
keys, and swearing furiously between his teeth.
" What news is there? " asked Guy, closing his
book. " Is the King worse ? "
" Not so, my lord. His Majesty is much better;
they begin to say he never was poisoned at all.
I had thought that your condition would change
at once for the better. And now I have orders . . .
more orders . . . orders to ... deuce take the
orders! I have to do as my superiors tell me."
" Would they shut me in an iron cage, like the
<pb>
victims of Louis XI. ? That would certainly be
unpleasant."
" No, my lord, not that. We have none of those
engines hereabouts. But I am charged to keep
you under scrutiny night and day, and to place
here in your cell a companion who" —
" Will be a spy, and make it his business to
misrepresent my motives, and distort the meaning
of my words and my least gestures," continued
Guy, rising to his feet. " In short, my good Ar-
tauld, you could not possibly have brought me
more disagreeable tidings. I had hoped to keep my
privacy. Whence comes this order? Who gave
it?"
"I do not know, messire. It was passed on to
me by the captain of the guards, who seemed as
averse to it as I am. I can do nothing to change
it; to-night I must bring you the man in question."
" Well," sighed Fougereuse, " the chalice must
be drunk, and to the dregs. Who has been elected
to this honorable office ? ''
" They named no particular person for it, and so
I hastened to choose for myself. The day before
yesterday, a sixth cousin of my own, as he claims,
arrived here from Brittany. He is a stubborn
young fellow, and not very clever, and he speaks
next to no French. I do not know what else to
do with him. It struck me, that in any event, he
would be less dangerous to you than a shrewder
head."
" Follow your own lead, Artauld, but do not
<pb>
compromise yourself on my account. You know
my star is fallen forever."
" I shall not be compromised, my lord. And
after all, what of it ? A jailer may have a heart,
only he must not show it. It will never be you
who will inform upon me ! "
As night gathered, Fougereuse submissively
awaited the room-mate foretold by Artauld. It
had cost him a severe inward struggle to accept
this new aggravation of the sorrow he had to bear:
an unjust advantage taken, which evidently meant
that he should be indicted, willingly or unwil-
lingly, for the crime of sorcery. What mysterious
enemy was so hot for his ruin ? What irrevocable
hatred had Fougereuse aroused in his former
career, that now in his adversity he should be
pursued with these vile vexations? " Never con-
sciously," he said to himself, " have I wronged any-
one, howsoever lightly. I have sought always to
oblige those who loved me least: I have had such
indulgence for my enemies that I have almost es-
tranged my best friends. What can I have done
to men, that they are so bitter against me?"
What, indeed, had he done to men? He had
put them to shame with his goodness, and made
them ill at ease under the shower of his favors.
Gratitude is a virtue not attained by common
natures: great souls sweeten with the sense of it,
but meanness grows embittered. A benefactor is a
creditor: more than one debtor, at a crisis, does
his best to escape the debt. Thanklessness is a
<pb>
reason for avoiding payment, and insolvent spirits
throw themselves eagerly into oblivion of good
received. The magnanimous Fougereuse had ex-
cused jealousies, ignored slanders, scorned silly
gossip and prattle ; but this obstinacy of cruelty,
this premeditated perfidy, pierced him to the heart.
The voice of the jailer, growling along the pas-
sage leading to the tower, was the signal to Guy
that his final hour of welcome solitude was over.
The door grated on its rusty hinges, and revealed
Leon Artauld, preceding a young peasant dressed
in the Breton costume. The face of the new-
comer was partly hidden under his long locks,
black as the raven's wing, and a wide-brimmed
hat, which it did not occur to him to remove in the
presence of the baron de Fougereuse.
" Here is the lad Alan, my lord," began Artauld,
introducing him. " So long as he eats and sleeps,
he is content. If he cannot amuse you, I hope at
least that he will not annoy you. You, Alanik!
hear what I say. You are here to serve this
gentleman: if you do well, I will reward you,
Do you understand ? "
"N'inland Ket" replied Alan, with a stupid
yawn.
"N''inland Ket! N'inland Kelt That is all
the idiot knows enough to say. Well, I wash my
hands of him! I have obeyed orders, and no man
can deny it. I give you good-night, my lord."
As soon as Fougereuse stood alone with his
singular companion, he looked him over from head
<pb>
to foot. Such extreme doltishness awoke his sus-
picion, and made him think it hid a snare of some
sort. As if to aid in his own examination, Alanik
took the lantern which Artauld had left behind
him, and held it up as high as his ears. Guy then
saw a countenance excessively tanned by the hot
sun of the plains, and two big blue eyes which
contrasted oddly with the gypsy complexion.
" Does not my lord of Fougereuse recognize
me?" asked the Breton, breaking without diffi-
culty into the purest French imaginable.
" Recognize you ? Where could I ever have seen
you ? Who are you ? . . . Heavenly powers ! "
cried the baron suddenly, in the most intense sur-
prise ; " those are the eyes of Lo'ic de Kernis! "
" It is Lo'ic all over," answered the boy, who
came, panting with emotion, to kneel close against
his master. " It is your poor page, my lord.
Have pity: do not betray me! "
" Lo'ic, Lo'ic ! " Fougereuse pressed hard, in his
own manacled hands, the hands of his young vo-
tary. "Dear, dear child! is it indeed you? I
am not in a dream, am I ? Tell me by what
miracle " •—
" Speak lower, my lord ; the walls have ears. I
bring you liberty! "
" Escape ? " asked Guy eagerly.
" Yes." Kernis drew a file from his bosom, and
showed it triumphantly. " Do you see this ? In
one little half-hour your chains will fall. You
must change clothes with me ; and I have the in-
<pb>
gredients to dye your hair and darken your skin,
my lord. Then you will be Alanik, and I the
prisoner. To-morrow it will be a simple matter
for you to ask to speak to the captain of the guard,
and tell him that Fougereuse is planning to break
away. And there in the yard below will be a
crowd of students inquiring for news from the
King: just let them abduct you. They will have
a boat ready to cross the river, and saddled horses
on the farther bank. In a few minutes you will
be free, and sure of a safe refuge. . . . Let us
hasten, master dear! The Breton frontier will
befriend you."
" Wait a moment," said Fougereuse, interrupt-
ing Lo'ic, who had already begun to file the irons
on his feet. " Wait a moment; the scheme is
worthy of consideration. . . . Who told you,
however, that I wished to escape?"
The page looked up in blank astonishment.
" Ah, but you must, my lord. That court breed
have sworn upon your destruction; they prefer you
defamed and dead. Flight to Brittany is your
only remaining hope. My duke is not like your
King, praised be the Lord ! And our Breton chiv-
alry would revenge you upon the ingrates of
Anjou."
" We will think it over, child. Lay down the
file, for we have plenty of time for consultation
before we act. From whom does this suggestion
come? From Villepreux ? "
" No," answered Loi'c hesitatingly. " It was
<pb>
not possible to communicate with him. I arranged
the whole thing myself, with some University
friends of mine — fine honest fellows they are !
Their lives are at your service."
Guy smiled, without replying, and reflected
a while. "And you — what is your part in the
clever plot? "
" I repeat that I should take your place here, let
come what may. What could they do to worthless
me?"
" Let me tell you, if you do not know. They
could condemn you to the scaffold for the crime of
high treason. I should say, rather, were you not
noble, that they would string you up, dry and high,
on the gallows. And the very best fate possible
to you would be a lodging for life in a cell like
this, or, indeed, in the dungeon below."
" What of it ? " asked Lo'ic, shrugging his shoul-
ders. " A great compensation that would be for
those gallant lords! They are welcome to pay
themselves, however, as they can. For my part, I
have been to confession; I have made my peace
with God: I am not afraid of the prospect. Let
me go on filing."
" You shall not go on. Do you think I am the
sort of man who would pledge his friend to death
in order to save himself? Fie, Messire de Kernis!
Have you not a flattering opinion of your lord ? I
shall never give you such an example of selfish-
ness and cowardice." And stooping quickly, Guy
caught up the file and tossed it out of the nearest
<pb>
loophole. " ' Q-et thee behind me, Satan !' There
is the temptation in a fathom of water. Amen to
it, and a pleasant voyage."
" What have you done ? " cried Lo'ic, bounding
up, with a face full of distress. " I, who came . . .
who hoped ... ah! it is more than I can bear.
You are . . . you are "... Words failed him ;
a great sob heaved his breast. He stood looking
wrathfully at his master, stamping his foot, and
muttering to himself.
"Hush now, my poor boy!" Fougereuse said
conciliatingly. " Your plan was useless, and would
only have sacrificed both our lives. I am touched
none the less by your devotion," he added in a
serious tone, offering his hands to Loi'c.
" I do not deserve thanks." The lad spoke very
low, and drew back slowly. " It was I who ruined
you."
" You ! What folly is this ?''
" It is no folly. It was I who ruined you by my
imprudence, and I wanted to atone. . . . Walter
de Maulny ... he made me talk over there at the
Red Rose. I never suspected. . . . The little
room without lock or key ... it was I who told
him that you shut yourself up there at night. . . .
And I went to Wolfram's house when the light
was burning. Maulny sent that wretch Piteux
after me. . . . He tried to play the spy on you in
the interest of his foxy patron; and I gave him a
lively fifteen days of it, so I did ! Then I kept
quiet, just because I was abominably proud, when
<pb>
one word would have given you light. . . . You
see, I ached to serve you in some important way,
so you could no longer be offended. ... I would
have saved you ... I was so hurt to have you
severe with me because of my duel ... and ...
and . . . can you never forgive me ? " wailed Lo'ic
in despair.
" I shall forgive you when I discover what your
fault is, scatterbrain. Never before was there a
penitent with such a foggy conscience. Come
nearer, draw a deep breath, and tell me, all over
again, that tangled story of which as yet I under-
stand nothing. . . . What were you saying about
Wolfram's house ?"
Somewhat relieved by his own outburst, Lo'ic
now could afford to wonder at the serenity of Fou-
gereuse at such a critical moment. He related
candidly everything which had passed at the Red
Rose. With one knee on the stone bench, and his
spread fingers against the wall, he leaned over the
captive, and murmured his whole confession in the
latter's ear, without venturing to face him. Guy
heard him uninterruptedly, save for a few brief
questions. He gazed at the floor meanwhile; he
did not lift his head, nor look in the boy's beseech-
ing eyes.
"I should like to clear up one circumstance
here," he began, when the page had ended. " In
the interior of Wolf's turret, did you see anything
unusual?"
"Yes, my lord."
<pb>
"What?"
"Two men . . . or two demons."
"Did you know who they were?"
"One had his back to me : I could not see him.'
"The other?"
"My lord!" . . .
"Who was the other? " the baron repeated, rais-
ing his voice.
"The other . . . some one I knew."
"And it was— ?"
"You," answered Lo'ic in a choked voice, yet
distinct and steady.
" Really ! Are you sure ? "
"I thought so; I think so yet. But if you say
I was deceived, I will believe your word rather
than my own senses."
"You were not deceived. Your senses were
right."
" I felt it, my lord."
" Did you tell Govier of your adventure and
your discovery ? "
"No, on my honor! I was aware that I had
the key to an important secret: I did not open my
lips to any living soul."
" That is well." Guy rose; and this time he
turned upon his companion that glance of profound
penetration which was characteristic of King
Rene's minister. " That is well. And now, Lo'iu,
answer me frankly, what did you think of your
master?"
"To speak truly, my lord, I was puzzled, and I
<pb>
searched for an explanation. I inferred that you
were sheltering some poor outlaw pursued by Louis
XI. or his bloodhounds, until such time as you
could obtain papers of pardon for him through the
duke of Anjou. Hence my anxiety and my si-
lence ; for I dared not question you. I should
have disclosed everything to you ; and this I was
on the very point of doing, when my quarrel with
Paul de Fleurenville estranged you and me. I was
mortally hurt by your coldness, to which I was un-
accustomed, and I vowed I would achieve some
glorious action, and make you repent. So I threw
that spy Jacob off the track; I risked my life a
dozen times coping with Walter de Maulny's secret
measures, and . . . my presumption recoils on me
alone, for you do not consider me even good enough
for the hangman's rope."
" Less good there than somewhere else, let us
hope. But how is this? You saw me, with your
own eyes, in the haunted house ; you know that I
visit by stealth the famous little room at home
which has neither lock nor key; you have heard
me accused of sorcery and diabolic dealings ; and
yet would you lay to my charge only the good
deed of befriending a fugitive? Was there not
some suspicion of me at the bottom of your soul,
Lo'ic? Come, I demand the truth."
" Oh ! " exclaimed the page straightening him-
self, his forehead flushing red : "did you think me
capable of that, my lord ? " His accent of indig-
nant surprise carried its own conviction to Guy's
<pb>
mind. He blessed God, who had placed on the
road to his Calvary this noble heart of a child.
"How could you imagine anything so infamous?
I may be wrong-headed, quarrelsome, wild, re-
bellious — and I am sorry to acknowledge that I
am all of that. But to doubt my master's honor!
To suspect him of commerce with the powers of
darkness, and of disloyalty to his sovereign! . . .
For what low creature do you take -me, baron de
Fougereuse ? "
" Pardon me, my faithful one !" cried Guy, clasp-
ing him, despite the weight of his chains, in his
arms. " May God love you for your generous
faith and bravery, your nobleness and craziness,
my incorrigible little fool! You were given me
to exercise my patience in prosperity, and to be
my comfort in adversity. What . . . tears? Are
you deploring your glorious actions achieved?
. . . And what is this you are trying to say?
That you wish absolution for your faults? Yes,
yes, with allmy heart. ' Go in peace, and sin no
more.' Were Villepreux here, I do believe he
would offer you, with no dissenting voice, a lieu-
tenancy in his Society of the Penitent Thief!"
" And oh, my dear lord," sighed Lo'ic, " why
did you throw away the file ? "
" Chiefly, I think, because I meant to. Had
you never considered that to flee would be to ad-
mit my guilt? . . . Let us forget this beautiful
conspiracy of rescue hatched in very young brains,
and have a sensible talk, if you are equal to it.
<pb>
How does my darling Isabelle get on ? What has
become of the good Lion ? What of the King? "
" The Lion defends you on every side, messire.
He is an army of a man. My lady Isabelle, on
her part, is a legion of angels: she will yet mollify
tigers, and melt the rocks in your behalf. On my
sword, I should never have dreamed there was such
courage and control in her, though I knew well
enough
' No Fougereuse ye find
Unmerciful, unkind I'
Queen Margaret has taken her under her special
care; and those two will bring that mad faction to
their senses. For all of her haughtiness, Queen
Margaret has a fine, true heart. I can pardon her
now for having married the King of England."
"She is loyal as any chevalier," replied Guy.
" It relieves me of a heavy load of anxiety to
know that Isabelle is with her. Margaret of
Anjou has suffered too much from unjust asper-
sions, and betrayals too, not to compassionate
others who suffer in like manner. Heaven guard
her for her tenderness to my orphan sister, who is
far from her only protector! The King, my ven-
erated master — can you tell me nothing of him?
Do they still say his life is in danger?"
"The King? Ah, the King, my lord, the King
would be certainly, so far as I can make out, ex-
actly as well as we are, were it not for this dis-
turbing affair. He is out of clanger, nor would
<pb>
he ever have been in it, if that plague of a Cor-
nelius had not raised the cry of poison. All his
illness amounted to, was a faint caused by the
cold, and a subsequent attack of fever brought
on him by the remedies of his illustrious doctor.
And if Antonio had been there, instead of that
illiterate fraud from Touraine, there would have
been no question of sickness at all."
"Then why am I here?" exclaimed the other.
" If I be exonerated from the charge of poison, on
what pretext do they hold me a prisoner? "
"Ah, that is the point! They are caught in the
net they spread for you; they would have you
bear the penalty of their folly! After such a
brilliant stroke, an arbitrary arrest, and all the
uproar following on a pretended treason, you can
conceive that they will not brand themselves before
the public as liars, by declaring your innocence.
No: they are bound to maintain appearances. So
Cornelius closets the King (when the only thing
the matter with him is just Cornelius), and upsets
him by making him believe that he is at the gates
of death. Nobody can approach his Majesty, and
everybody acts according to his own whim. The
mind of your godly relative Walter is set on
finding you guilty, in any event. The traitor has
removed his mask."
" Eh ? Maulny declaring publicly against me ? "
Guy broke in. "Very prompt of you, my cousin
Walter!"
" My lord, you have no worse enemy. This whole
<pb>
campaign is his work. It is he who set Piteux to
watch you; it is he who spreads calumnies in your
path; it is he who now renounces and oppresses
you. On his line of argument, if you are not an
assassin, you are a sorcerer. It is possible you
did not actually poison the King, but you cer-
tainly did bewitch and mesmerize him; and if
you be unconvicted of crime, yet you are strongly
suspected of it. That is enough to make them
keep you in prison. The honorable aldermen find
it entirely expedient, and vote blindly for it.
People have spoken ill of you for too long a
time: there must be some truth to bear them out!
' No smoke without fire I' they quote gleefully.
Each and all say that. It never enters any one's
head to believe you blameless. I did not dream
there were so many imbeciles alive."
" Alas, Lo'ic! a crowd of fools led by a handful
of knaves: that is the pageant of the majority.
But I do not see that the situation is as desperate
as you, in your inexperience, fear. When the
King is restored to health, I shall receive justice.
. . . Why do you shake your head ? "
" Once upon a time, my gentle lord, I displeased
you, because I cast a slur upon the firmness of char-
acter of your beloved monarch. But please allow
me to say that he would pardon ten guilty persons,
before he would justify one who is innocent. He
would have to overturn too many opinions, and
defy too many of his friends. Walter de Maulny
has newly secured the King's confidence, and he
<pb>
will never let it be forfeited .again. God is our
only hope, since unfortunately " •—•
"Since unfortunately," Guy repeated laugh-
ingly, " I threw away the file, and declined the aid
of your unique and precious allies, the students.
Well, enough of that! But explain to me to what
providential chance, or masterly strategy, I owe
the pleasure of sharing my jail with you masque-
rading as an official spy ? I cannot account for it,
I own."
It was now Lo'ic's turn to laugh: a frank laugh,
which rang 'against the stone vaultings, an un-
wonted echo there. " The very neatest trick that
ever I played in all my life, my lord ! Consider how
I stand in Jacob Piteux's place, and how Maulny
believes, in good faith, that he is shut up with
you! Why, I should have to laugh at the mem-
ory of it, were I under the headsman's axe ! And
to think that it was Villepreux who outwitted that
arch-hypocrite ! . . . I must make up some rhymes
about it when we get safely out of this."
"Awaiting the hour when you can sing your
adventures, tell them to me at once in prose, in-
stead of rousing the owls, and perhaps Artauld
himself. You were saying that Piteux "...
" Here is the whole story," began the page,
cautiously lowering his voice. " When that luck-
less hunting-party broke up, the very first care of
• Messire Robert was to look to the security of those
of your household, fearing that they might be
arrested as accomplices of your imaginary crime
<pb>
of poisoning. He sent Vincent down to Fouge-
reuse, escorted by four stout Penitent Thieves, in
order to forewarn your vassals, and prepare them
for anything which might happen. Hardly had he
set out, when Dismas, the sergeant, brought in to
us a bundle of rags, upon which one of the horses
had inadvertently walked. Well, this bundle of
rags, when examined, turned out to be nothing else
than my old acquaintance Jacob. Messire Robert
began to question him, and under the Lion's paw
that miserable weasel confessed a good deal. He
informed us that Maulny paid him, or rather prom-
ised him payment, to give him a daily account of
your proceedings, and to circulate among the peas-
antry the same falsehoods which Walter was busy
circulating at court. His Argus-like offices were
to extend even to your cell; so Master Piteux was
on his way accordingly to the turnkey, to offer him-
self as valet. Maulny was going to take care of
the rest. You will guess that we modified the
business to suit our own fancy. Jacob, a wee bit
damaged by the horse's shoe, was charitably put
in a good bed, with two new-baptized Penitent
Thieves to nurse him. We locked the door on
him so as to insure him proper rest, and then Dis-
mas stained my face and my hair, as you see.
They know a wonderful number of things, those
Saracens ! I remembered that I was a shepherd
once, and I put on the shepherd dress and behavior,
and cousined it with Artauld, who received me
with open arms. For two long days I watched in
<pb>
vain for an occasion to get near you. Two Bre-
tons, kinsmen of mine, Tredaniel and Keranflech,
University students, recognized me when they
came in to obtain court news, and we concocted
together the plan of escape which you rejected."
"Yes, yes: what then?"
" Then came the order to place a spy at this
post; and Artauld did not hunt for any one
else. I was there: now I am here, and here I
stay."
" You risked your life, and you risk it still, my
boldest of Bretons! Are you quite sure that
Artauld " —
"How often I ask myself that! Is Artauld my
dupe, or am I his ? I cannot tell; but he seems to
me to be full of good will towards you. You have
friends yet, my lord; and chief among them,
Villepreux, who is gathering your vassals and his
own, to re-enforce the Penitent Thieves."
" That is the Lion again, with his Palestine
ideas ! " cried Fougereuse in alarm. " What folly!
It means that he is leading the poor creatures
straight to the gibbet, and himself to the scaffold.
I cannot bear " —
" You can never prevent the Lion from acting
after his own fashion, dearest master. Let him
alone! Nobody will be very eager to interfere
with the captain of the Penitent Thieves. And as
to your own people, do not worry. Is it not a
vassal's first duty to proffer his life in his lord's
service? You will find that they will not fail
<pb>
you. Never will those lads at Fougereuse have a
finer chance to die gloriously."
" God forbid," answered Guy, in deep dejec-
tion, " that only for my sake, and not for the
King's, I should risk one hair of the head of any
servant of mine! I am held accountable by God
for those He has confided to me, and I would
rather die a thousand deaths than draw them into
the sin of unjust rebellion. May Our Lady give
me her assistance !" he added, and he made the
sign of the Cross. For some moments he remained
in profound thought. Lo'ic, disconcerted, placed
himself silently at one of the loopholes.
The chimes of Saint Maurice rang for eight
o'clock. Deep night enwrapped the town and the
fields beyond, as for many previous hours it had
fallen on the two in the tower. A sound, rhythmic
and melodious, arose faintly from the river below,
and seemed to float nearer and nearer. Lo'ic leaned
over the stone sill in the thick wall, holding his
breath that he might hear the better. Fougereuse
lifted his head in surprise. " What can that be, so
late as this ? "
" Hush, my lord! Do you not catch the plash
of oars, as well as the song ? They are pilgrims
from Saint Magdalen's shrine, returning from
Baumette on the Maine boats, and hurrying to
reach home before curfew-time. Let me listen to
their music."
The voices were so distinct that it was easy to
follow the words of the choral. What the pris-
<pb>
oners heard was a sweet, melancholy air, a sort of
barcarolle brought from Sicily, to which a number
of minstrels of that day had fitted their own poetic
conceptions. But these particular strophes were
on no imaginary theme.
" Against a turret stone
Darkly laid,
King Richard, when his own
Him betrayed,
Sad to himself could sing: —
' Hapless King,
Aloof from all that live!
Lord, of Thy mercy give
To me,
To die, or else be free.1 "
"Do you recall it, master?" the page whispered.
" It is the poem you made for Queen Margaret,
whose husband is yet imprisoned by his subjects."
Guy nodded his head, for he recalled it well.
The chorus began again: —
" ' Rise, ye whom England bore,
Soldier lords !
Where is the faith ye swore
On your swords f
Friends fain to perish too,
How of you
Your Richard is forgot!
Lord, grant another lot
To me:
To die, or else be free.1 "
The captive baron rose up mechanically, and
sang with the pilgrims the next stanza: —
<pb>
" ' If any dared enchain
In such dole,
Some knight of my domain,
Ere his soul
One added pang should bear,
I were there !
But Richard waits, unheard.
Lord, speak that better word
To me: v
Die thou ! or else, Be free !' "
" Not a word now, my lord, I beg of you!" con-
tinued Lo'ic, very much agitated. " I must not
lose what is to follow."
The foremost wherries had reached the base of
the tower, and the harmonies welled up, beautifully
clear.
" Hurt Lion caged within,
Hush: and hear
The answering tune begin,
Hopeful, dear,
Which on the midnight cast
Mounts at last: —
4 Richard, forlorn indeed !
God sends thee in thy need.
(Ah, see!)
Love quickly come to free.
'In service to thy great
Sorrowing,
True zeal I dedicate,
O my King !
My blood is at thy call.
Blondel, remembering all,
Must be
Thy fate, to set thee free.1 "
<pb>
For an instant the voices were still, and falling
oars made the only sound in the evening air. Be-
fore Fougereuse could foresee his intention, the
other had seized the lantern and passed it quickly,
several times in succession, across one of the open-
ings.
"Rash boy, what are you doing?" exclaimed
his companion. " Have you determined on your
own destruction ? Stop instantly! "
" Six . . . seven," counted the page. " Be not
alarmed, my lord. It was pre-arranged. Now
sing on, my brave fellows ! "
From the succeeding boats, rowed close beneath,
came the plaintive continuation : —
" ' Those bonds in victor strife
Shall dispart;
Or let the riven life
From my heart
Be prayer and blessing shed
On thy head I
To him whom men forsook,
Our Lord of Armies look :
That he
Go glorious yet, and free!' "
Then the music commenced to die away, and it
was only with difficulty that Kernis was able to
distinguish the last verse : —
"Ye courtiers, drain the cup,
Shout, and smile :
' Itichard is towering up
From fxllf.
<pb>
Before your Lion bow,
England! now.
What though the whole world failed t
For him one friend availed. —
Be he
For ever great and free ! "
" Bravo!" cried Lo'ic, clapping his hands. " Bra-
vissimo, my worthy fellow-students! Ah, the faith-
ful hearts that you have in them, my lord ! They
would never allow you to be led to the block,
without thumping the watch well for it! "
" I believe it readily; for thumping the watch
was ever their favorite pastime. But, by all the
saints of Brittany, it would appear that you are in
a fair way to lose whatever shreds of wit Heaven
allotted you. Why all this flutter on account of a
mere ballad ? "
" That ballad, my dear master, is a signal; this
flutter means that in default of rescuing you by
main force, the whole University, from to-morrow
on, will importune the King to liberate you. They
will save you, despite yourself. Noel to the stu-
dents ! " continued the youth, in a transport of
enthusiasm. "Noel to ballads too! Long live the
fools ! because it is only they who can get the bet-
ter of the wise."
" Mercy ! I have no page any more, but a regu-
lar fanatic," said Guy. " He will soon make me
deplore the absence of Master Piteux. You were
too adventurous, getting yourself into this cage,
my flyaway falcon, and you will break your wings
<pb>
on the bars. No more conspiracies, or I shall de-
nounce you to Artauld the jailer. Let us sleep in
peace to-night, and may inner light come with the
morning!"
Only one of the two slept in peace, and that was
Lo'ic. Guy de Fougereuse did not close his eyes,
and the morrow's dawn found him at prayers.
The rays of the rising sun were gilding the limpid
surface of the Maine, and peering timidly into the
tower cell, when Guy heard the door being pushed
ajar slowly, and with unwonted caution.
" Go in quickly." This from Artauld, in a con-
fidential whisper.
A shadow withdrew from the half-open entrance,
which was noiselessly closed. Fougereuse rose
briskly, and found himself confronted by the her-
mit of Avrille wood.
"You here, Father!"
" My dear son, my poor child! " answered the
good monk, embracing him. " Were you not ex-
pecting me? Did you think I would abandon
you? What! gyves? . . . They have spared you
no humiliation."
" Father, have you come to prepare me for
death ?" asked Guy in low, firm tones.
" Happily, Guy, we have not reached that crisis.
I bring you a message from the Abbot of Saint-
Aubin." The old man drew from his bosom a
parchment covered with fine writing, which he
held towards Fougereuse.
" Give it me! give it me!" exclaimed the
<pb>
prisoner eagerly, taking the script. "But speak
softly, I implore you. I have a comrade asleep
here whom we must not waken : Lo'ic, my Breton
page."
"Very well, my son. Would it not be more
prudent to hold our conversation in Latin, as
Lo'ic, if I remember accurately, is no great
scholar?"
Guy made an affirmative sign. Bending over it,
by the glimmering daylight piercing the wall, he
scanned attentively his consoling letter. When
he had read it through, he raised his head, breath-
ing like a man from whom a great weight had
fallen. "The Right Reverend Abbot is full of
kindness," he said, re-folding the parchment; " I
shall always be grateful to him for his good
counsel. "
" But not grateful enough, perhaps, to follow
it?" questioned the monk, noticing the anxious
face before him.
" Father, tell me what I ought to do. Dom
Maurice officially relieves me from iny oath of
silence, and presses me to disburden him in like
manner of the secret of the confessional. He
would inform the King of everything, and at once.
What do you think of it?"
"I agree with him; only the avowal would come
with better grace, it seems to me, from your own
lips. Your oath was an ill-advised thing, which
would never have been pronounced had you delib-
erated longer. You have played, as it were, with
<pb>
the flame, and now we must put out the fire. God
grant it may not be too late !"
" You know I am not the only one to consider.
My guest in the turret knows naught of it; and
I would not act without his permission."
" What are you saying, Guy ? He knows naught
of it ? ... I will hasten to him, and bring him
hither, that he may unlock your lips and bid you
justify yourself openly."
" A moment, Father! One other expedient is
worth trying, before we make all this fuss. It was
on the King's account that I was imprisoned: a
direct appeal to him may yet right everything. I
trust he will never refuse to believe my word,
and" —
" ' Put not your trust in princes,' " the old hermit
interrupted, gravely shaking his head. " You cling
to a hollow mockery, my lord."
" Have a care, lest you misjudge his Majesty.
He cannot soon forget the many good offices I have
rendered, the many confidences and testimonies of
affection between us. Had I served God half so
passionately, I should be a great saint to-day," the
baron added, with a deep sigh.
" Oh, that you had done so, dear son! But this
is not the time for regrets. Believe me, for I have
had long experience of men, the King will be all
the more likely to forsake you, because he once
loved and seconded you. Give him, therefore, the
proofs of your innocence, and not mere declara-
tions."
<pb>
" Well, Father, the issue will decide it. I wish
to put my theory to the test," answered the cap-
tive, standing with fire in his eye. " I shall make
one. final effort: I will learn whether our sove-
reign's heart holds only forgetfulness and indiffer-
ence for me; whether I have been to him a friend
whom he trusts, or a toy to use and then to break!
If the hand of God sever this old tie, nothing can
hinder me longer from taking your advice. But
until that day, I would be the master of my own
secret."
The extraordinary vehemence with which Guy
spoke impressed the hermit, who listened thought-
fully.
" Follow your own convictions, son," he said at
last, with resolution and gravity, " and may they
lead you in the true way ! I pray Our Saviour to
strengthen your shoulders for the heavy cross you
are preparing for yourself, and which I would fain
have had spared you; but per crucem ad lucem:
wisdom springs from sorrow. ' Ought not Christ to
have suffered these tilings, and so to enter into His
glory?1 And your heart will have to be over-
whelmed with disillusion, before it finds peace.
Drain the final drop of your chalice, and satisfy
yourself. Have you anything else to say to me ? "
The younger man came slowly towards him, and
knelt at his feet. Bowing his head, he began, in
a voice which revealed something.of the emotion
within: "Bless me, Father, for I have sinned."
And the venerable monk, inclining towards his
<pb>
penitent, lent an attentive ear to the confession
of Guy de Fougereuse.
Aside from the loyal affection of Villepreux, and
the gratitude of the poor folk of Angers, how hate
and envy flourished! The most odious reports
were those most willingly received. All the crimes
of Giles de Retz, increased in number and inten-'
sified in degree, were attributed to the unfortunate
Fougereuse. Court and city vied with each other
in false testimony and in silly credulity. " Fouge-
reuse is a vampire. Fougereuse can make gold
with blood. Fougereuse goes to the orgies of the
sorcerers, and leads the Devil's dances. Fouge-
reuse changes himself into a wolf, an owl, a snake."
Everybody had met him under one or the other
of these disguises. "Fougereuse weaves spells,
and, being a witch, causes all the misery in Angers.
He blights those whom he does not like, and de-
populates the town in order to fill the cemeteries."
These accusations were exchanged on the threshold
of every shop, at the corner of every street. And
at court it was added: " Fougereuse is a traitor.
He has been bought by King Louis of France, or
else by Edward of England. Fougereuse is a regi-
cide, sworn to compass our liege Rene''s death.
Fougereuse is a rebel who incites the people, and
spawns sedition." It needed less than this to fur-
nish matter for ten indictments, each calling for
capital punishment. Villepreux began to think that
<pb>
the only way to save his friend alive, was to have
him carried off before he could be brought to trial.
Isabelle, nevertheless, did not lose courage. Her
young dignity, her sweet reserve and modesty, her
unwavering confidence in her brother's virtue, and
her faith that she should see him freed, impressed
many minds. She concealed her tears and her
aching heart, and prayed without ceasing. She
found a way to check Robert's impetuosity, to
uphold the good repute of her race, to touch and
convince Queen Margaret, who ended by espous-
ing her cause.
" Poor little maid! How proud you were of your
brother I" Margaret had murmured 011 the even-
ing of Guy's arrest.
" It is to-night that I am proudest, Madame,"
replied Isabelle. " For yesterday I was the sister
of a proscribed man; now I am the sister of a
martyr." And this brave answer won her the
approbation of the royal woman who had known
adversity.
Isabelle's hope hinged on the King's recovery.
She longed to approach him to plead for Guy, and
to reveal the motives of that malevolence with
which Walter de Maulny pursued him. The mask
of disinterested friendship with which Walter cov-
ered his dark dealings was no longer needed, now
that the baron was out of the way. No other per-
son in the city was quite so eager to rend his cousin's
reputation, and repeat the vilest slanders. He
affected extreme grief to think Guy should be
<pb>
guilty of such infamous treason. He assumed so
well his affectation of absolute attachment to the
King's person, that he succeeded in getting ad-
mitted to the sick chamber, although the two
Queens and Prince Edward had been hitherto the
sole visitors tolerated by the domineering Cornelius.
On the fourth day of the King's illness, Queen
Margaret was preparing to go to her father's cham-
ber, intending to speak a word to him in favor
of Fougereuse. She was passing through the long
galleries leading to the royal apartments in the
palace, when a stifled sob caused her to turn around.
Against a great piece of tapestry, which, serving
as a curtain, divided the gallery into two unequal
parts, stood Isabelle de Fougereuse, pale and trem-
ulous, but with anger, not with fear. Her eyes
shone with tears; the sobs which shook her breast
seemed bred of intolerable pain, and yet were
suppressed by a gigantic effort. With her hand
clenched against the folds of the tapestry, and her
head bent in the attitude of listening, Isabelle
motioned to the Queen to approach noiselessly.
Margaret advanced, astonished at her odd sum-
mons, and wondering for the moment if her
troubles had affected the poor child's brain. She
spoke very gently. " What are you doing here,
Isabelle?"
" Listen, Madame: listen to what they are say-
ing! " the girl replied, in a barely audible, quiver-
ing, broken voice.
A confused murmur was borne from the other
<pb>
side of the gallery. Margaret knew that an eager
crowd must be gathering there, in order to obtain
from Cornelius the latest tidings of the King.
And she understood also how Isabelle, who
came thither to await her, found herself brought
to a standstill between his Majesty's apartments
and this assemblage of persons hostile to her
brother. Fougereuse: his was the one name
mingled with all their gossip; and the tones of
hate, anger, mockery, and scorn in which it was
pronounced, pierced his young sister to the heart.
For the first time she heard it all. She scanned
the abyss of shame into which detraction had cast
him; she saw his pure record trailed in the mire;
and her whole soul revolted against the dishonor-
ing of her race.
" The cowards, the cowards!" she panted, her
face suffused; "what! all, all persecuting the in-
nocent? Not one objecting, not even one? Is
there no courage left in the world?"
She trembled so, that Margaret passed her arm
around the girl to sustain her. The words " deg-
radation," "torture," "the stake," came clearly
to their ears. The Queen spoke hastily, and in
disgust. " This is too much! " she said. And she
stretched forth her hand to raise the curtain and
show herself, in majestic antagonism, to ,the eyes
of the elegant mob, just as a soldierly voice, at
the far end of the gallery, threw a defiance to the
enemies of Fougereuse. A tumult arose at once.
" Are you not a noble champion of sorcerers and
<pb>
poisoners I " they cried. " Lion, you are blinded and
duped. Roar as you will, and unsheathe all your
claws, your friend will nevertheless be burned as
a witch. His name will be struck from the roll
of knighthood, and sunk in infamy. And that
will be simple justice."
"Carry it out, then, my lords," replied Ville-
preux without excitement, "since it would be a
deed so worthy of you. But I do not expect to
act as your accomplice. If you drive Fougereuse
to the stake, I shall go along with him, flanked
by my Penitent Thieves, and protesting against
the sentence. It will be a bold executioner who
will proceed! If you degrade from his rank the
noblest and the bravest among you, I shall stand
at his side, and be proud of my post. Each time
that the herald-at-arms pronounces a charge of
felony and bad faith, I will cry out that he lies,
and drown his voice. And when Guy is placed
in the ignominious cart, I shall bend my .knee be-
fore him, and ask his pardon, in the name of all
the chivalry of Anjou. Thus I intend doing, my
lords and gentlemen. It is for you to say whether
you will oppose me."
A storm of comment arose in the wake of this
fierce apostrophe. The Queen of England, judg-
ing that it was now her opportunity to intervene,
raised the heavy draperies, and stood suddenly
confronting the startled group. She imposed
silence upon them with a gesture. Before the
censure in her eyes their own eyes fell.
<pb>
"It was well spoken, my Crusader!" she said
first, addressing Villepreux. " Be the baron de
Fougereuse innocent or guilty, he has one strong
heart to defend him. My lord Robert, will you
do me a service ? "
"Name it, Madame, and you shall be obeyed,"
Villepreux responded, bowing low.
"Then, pray, go seek Prince Edward, my son.
I know not where he may be at this moment, and
I desire him to join me, without delay, in the
King's chamber. Tell him that I await him there,
and that he must make haste."
As soon as Robert had left the gallery to carry
the message which was the means of withdrawing
him from the unfriendly company, the Queen
turned again towards them.
" The court of Anjou has changed sadly since
my youth, gentlemen! There was a time when
any knight would have blushed to hear the absent
vilified, and to see the fallen struck anew. You
force me to regret the past." And before aught
could be uttered in reply, Margaret had vanished
behind the tapestry. Once more she found herself
alone with Isabelle, whose eloquent blue eyes
thanked her and besought her, better than any
words.
" Come, Isabelle," continued the Queen, " come
with me to my father: you shall speak to him at
once. And let us go quickly, my daughter, for
we have no time to lose." Margaret had experi-
ence and clear-sightedness. Even as birds of prey
<pb>
anticipate a man's death in the desert, and hover
around a breathing body which will soon bo but
a corpse, so these calumniators foretold ruin and
disgrace, and gathered together furiously to rend
the reputation of one who was given up for lost.
It seemed that Fougereuse must already be con-
demned, that only thus could be explained such a
dismemberment of his good name, by his flatterers
of yesterday. The exiled sovereign, leading Isa-
belle, entered the royal apartment, which was
strictly guarded by the doctor Cornelius.
Rene" I., Duke of Anjou and Lorraine, King
of Sicily and Aragon, whom history has rightly
named " good King Ren<3," was then an amiable
old man, fatherly and sweet. When Margaret ad-
vanced, her arm resting on that of the trembling
girl, he received her with most tender welcomes.
Stretched in a great armchair drawn close to the
window, the august invalid wore a long robe of
black velvet trimmed with fur, and his cap, of
like material, was richly embroidered with the
arms of Anjou. His venerable countenance, with
its mobile features, bespoke an unimpaired mind,
and his vigor and vivacity were astonishing at his
age. Illness had left no special traces upon him.
His Queen, Joan, seated near, was turning over
the leaves of a magnificently illuminated book ;
and Rene', who was the author of the designs, was
smilingly explaining to her the thread of the alle-
gory. Not far off, a little group of familiar atten-
dants, among whom Maulny and Cornelius were
<pb>
conspicuous, followed, with respectful attention,
the remarks of the royal artist.
" Here, at last, is my dearest daughter ! " cried
Rene, when Margaret sank down at his side to re-
ceive his blessing. " Here is my Pearl of Anjou,
the brightest jewel of my crown, whom I should
never have intrusted to the rude hands of the Eng-
lish. . . . May Heaven keep you, my child. May
your filial heart glean a little gladness from your
old father's returning health ! "
" Our joy is very great, sire; so great that I
would have every soul share it! " Margaret an-
swered. " And therefore I felt confident I should
not incur your displeasure by bringing with me a
petitioner, whose only hope is in your sovereign
bounty."
" Bid her approach, my daughter. God has
been too merciful to me that I should refuse
mercy to my subjects. . . . But who is this ?
Isabelle de Fougereuse ? You, my poor little
one ?" And a murmur of surprise ran around
the room, when the girl, almost fainting, fell on
her knees beside the King's armchair.
"My liege, my liege, listen to me!" Her voice
was weak, but her clasped hands, her face uplifted,
her cheeks wet with anguished tears, her whole
mien and attitude, pleaded loudly for her.
" What would you have, Isabelle ? " said the
kind Rene, touched at the spectacle of so much
suffering in so gentle a creature. "Come, do not
shake so, but tell me your wish. Whatever be
<pb>
your brother's misdeeds, you are not smirched with
them ; and your prince desires to be just."
" It is to your sense of justice that I make my
appeal," Isabelle began, forgetting her fears in the
advocacy of a cause she held so dear. " Pity me,
sire : help a lonely and abandoned orphan who
has nona to befriend her save God in Heaven and
her earthly King. I have placed my trust in you;
I entreat you to preserve me against the enemies
of my brother and my house."
" What is your meaning, child ? Has any one
wronged you? If so, do but name him, and we
shall learn whether there is justice in Anjou. You
will not have called in vain upon my protection."
" You ask whether any one has wronged me,
sire! What, then, in your judgment, is the un-
foreseen arrest of the baron de Fougereuse without
the royal warrant, and his detention in a dark cell,
as if he were the lowest malefactor ? What, then,
is the abominable accusation of would-be murder,
what are these infamous calumnies continually
dinned in my ears by all your court ? What is
this bitter sentence of degradation and death pro-
nounced on him, beforehand, by lips which have
no authority ? What is the brand upon his honor,
and upon the honor of our ancestors, if not a mor-
tal offence to me, and the most cruel injury I can
sustain? Why should I complain to my sovereign
lord, if not to claim justice against persecution ?
Sire, I am the sister of an innocent man ! Guy is
the victim of tyranny: he has been condemned
<pb>
without a hearing, and struck down when he was
unable to defend himself. They have taken from
your side the most loyal of all your servants and
subjects. So sure was he of your good will, that
he scorned precautions in his danger. The hand
of his master had ever been righteous towards him.
His foes seized upon an hour of confusion to wrest
him from you, and bury him alive between walls
silent as the tomb. Sire, will you sanction an act
of iniquity committed without your knowledge ?
Will you incriminate one whom of late you loved,
in whom you trusted ? I beg you," cried Isabelle,
beginning to feel the chill of the silence around
her, " I adjure you, my lord and King, by the sal-
vation of your soul, by the fear of the awful judg-
ment of God, set Guy free : give me back my
brother! "
This proud and high harangue, very different
from the plaint expected from the delicate girl,
caused a great commotion. What had been looked
for was an appeal for pardon in behalf of an of-
fender ; and here was an indignant remonstrant,
haughtily invoking the rehabilitation of the op-
pressed. Walter de Maulny grew pale with
uneasiness, and dreaded to see his prey escape
him.
" It is a strange discourse that you have ad-
dressed to me, my lady Isabelle," Rene gravely
replied. "When Fougereuse's guilt is proven, do
you dare maintain him to be blameless, and de-
mand that action be taken against his accusers?
<pb>
Sorrow has deranged the poor child," he added
compassionately, as he beheld her burst into tears.
" Your brother was bold indeed to dictate to you
such language." •
" Guy dictate to me, sire! Are you not aware
that no person is admitted where he is ? Pie is in
solitary confinement, and for four days now,I know
not whether he be living or dead."
" This is too rigorous, seneschal." Rene' spoke
to Philip de Beauvau, who had just entered the
room. " However bad a prisoner be, one ought
not to deny him the means of repentance and
salvation. And, henceforth, grant permission to
this lady to visit her brother at any time. Isa-
belle, do you heed my words. If you desire to
save Guy, an ingrate who was once dear to me,
inspire him with more humble sentiments, and ob-
tain from him an acknowledgment of his fault.
He may be less culpable than he seems. No one
is more eager that I am, to have him clear himself
from the charges brought against him. For the
sake of the services rendered me long ago by your
father, baron Amaury, and out of consideration for
you who lose in Guy your sole natural protector,
I am disposed to be very lenient with him. But I
exact a full confession of these secret arts, these
mysterious and abhorred measures. Bring that
proud temper to submission, and I promise you
. . . yes, I can promise you, my dear child, to
be propitious to Fougereuse. ' God wills not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he be converted, and
<pb>
live.1 Arise, Isabelle. Go and tell your brother
that his deliverance is in his own hands, and that
his future depends upon his candor !"
" Must I say to him, sire, that his King supposes
him to have sought and willed his destruction ? "
Isabelle queried, as she rose to her feet. " Can
you truly deem Guy capable of that unspeakable
sin ? Is it that which you invite him to avow ? "
" No, Isabelle: I do not accuse him of poison-
ing, for such black ingratitude is incredible. But
he must answer for having practised magic, for
having woven spells; and it were far better for
him to admit as much to his indulgent sovereign,
rather than to the implacable judges. Tell him
that too, my child. It is not the King who rea-
sons with you, but the old comrade-in-arms of your
brave father."
"Alas, your Majesty!" sighed the girl, again
joining her hands. " God knows that I am thank-
ful for your liberal kindness; but is this all I can
obtain from you ? I can read my brother's choice.
He would prefer a cruel death, rather than that
the least suspicion should enter your mind against
him. You send to him, with this word that he
must admit such enormities in order to save his
life, me, who am his sister! me, who have had
from his boyhood the key to that Christian heart,
and believe that it has never forfeited the grace of
his baptism! me, whose honor is forever one with
his own! Can I obey you? I implore you on my
knees to alter that message! I assure you, I swear
<pb>
to you, Guy is guiltless. Be not generous by
halves, sire. You, who soften towards convicted
offenders, suffer yourself to be persuaded in favor
of a just man! Can you not put faith in what I
say, sire ? Is there nothing in your conscience
which sides with me, when I proclaim the inno-
cence of Guy de Fougereuse ? "
" No more, Isabelle, my poor child. You move
my compassion. You are too loyal, too pure, to
have an understanding of evil. At my age one is
wiser, alas ! Long since, I was betrayed by those
in whom I trusted, by my most intimate servants;
and the conduct of Fougereuse gives me no new
pang. I pity you, Isabelle; I am most willing to
pardon a repentant culprit. But more than this
I cannot do. Go now, and visit your captive.
Margaret, take the child in charge. . . . Yet an-
other word with you," the King added, motion-
ing to the girl to approach him again. " You were
wrong, my lady, in stating that all your kinsfolk
had forsaken you. I know one of them who is
devoted to you: your cousin Walter de Maulny."
Isabelle's blood stirred; she raised her golden
head apprehensively. Maulny, hearing his name,
came forward. " Walter loves you," continued
the King; " your misfortunes have not dampened
his sincere attachment. He has told me something
of his longing to see you installed as the chate-
laine of Maulny. What do you say ? "
" I beg my beautiful cousin not to reject my
suit," added Walter himself, bowing before Isa-
<pb>
belle, with that patrician grace and exquisite
courtesy for which men and women had admired
him in the heyday of his career. " My most sacred
wish, for a long while, has been to see our desti-
nies united; but I should not have presumed to
aspire to such an honor, had not our gracious sov-
ereign seen fit to encourage my hope." He spoke
further in the same strain, for Isabelle's silence
misled him: yet he stopped short in the middle of
his distasteful compliments and hollow phrases,
when the young eyes met his own. That glance
of icy scorn, clear and penetrating as a steel blade,
was characteristic of Guy in certain moods, but it
sat strangely upon sweet Isabelle. Her fraternal
love, her pride of temperament and of race, awoke
in her every energy of her soul. For the moment,
the girl looked so like her brother that Maulny
was confounded; and bold as he was, his words
failed him.
" Guy will answer you for me, cousin! " She
contented herself with this short response, delivered
in the best Fougereuse manner. Then, turning
towards Rene" of Anjou, she went on: "I beseech
your Majesty, speak not to me of marriage, while
my brother is in danger. I have no thought for
any but for him."
" Very well, very well; Walter will wait," re-
plied the King, in a good-humored concession.
" May God help you and uphold you !"
Isabelle de Fougereuse took a respectful leave
of the aged monarch. Queen Margaret accom-
<pb>
panied her, mournfully shaking her head. She
had expected a better result from the interview.
Queen Joan withdrew at the same time.
Meanwhile the King was musing. " That child
has a true heart, and very fine courage. She is
Amaury de Fougereuse's own daughter, and for
her sake I must show mercy to her unhappy
brother. . . . What are you saying, seneschal ? "
" I was saying, sire, that mercy would be a dif-
ficult as well as an unnecessary thing. That
wicked ally of Fougereuse, Robert de Villepreux,
is trying to thwart the law: his arrogant behavior
is insufferable. He has converted the baron's resi-
dence into a veritable stronghold, guarded by his
rascals out of Palestine. He is sowing rebellion
amid the people. He defies and insults whomso-
ever mentions his friend in his presence. Finally,
he has just welcomed to town an armed troop, com-
posed of the Fougereuse and Villepreux vassals:
I expect at any moment to see him unfurl his
standard, and lead his own Thieves to an assault
upon the prison ! "
"Villepreux a rebel?" the King cried incredu-
lously. " You assert too much, my lord seneschal.
I know my Lion : he is proud, impetuous, and fond
of fight, but he is docile and gentle to me, his
master. Send him to me, and we shall discover
the meaning of this muster, and of these seditious
intentions."
Cornelius murmured: " I fear the King could
hardly bear the fatigue of another audience."
<pb>
" Send Villepreux to me!" Rene repeated
authoritatively. " I must speak with him. Go
seek him, Fleurenville, and do not return with-
out him."
The young page bowed, and was setting forth
to fulfil his duty, when the door swung open be-
fore Prince Edward of Lancaster, followed by
Villepreux himself.
" Welcome, dear grandson!" cried the King.
" You bring me the very man whom I most wished
to see. Come hither, Robert de Villepreux, and
explain yourself to the seneschal! Some persons
are disturbed to find you fortifying a house in the
city, assembling there your vassals and men-at-
arms, and pursuing other measures which are
hardly in conformity with your sworn allegiance.
They allege, besides, that you defy and insult my
servants, in the name of Fougereuse. What does
all this signify ? "
"If the King question me, I will answer," re-
joined Villepreux; " but I will not acknowledge
the right of Philip de Beauvau to interrogate me
concerning anything I choose to do. Who am
I, that I should receive his orders? Under God,
I derive but from the King, and him alone will I
obey."
" It is the King who commands you to speak,"
said Rene. At the bottom of his heart, he was
flattered to be so addressed by the untameable Lion,
who was meek to no one else.
"Then here is the truth, sire. I gathered my
<pb>
soldiers together at the palace of Fougereuse, that
I might thus prevent them from seeking public
quarrels, and causing public disorder. They are
exasperated at Guy's detention; they would not
have lacked opportunity to fall foul of some of
your officers. If I have the doors watched and
guarded, it is because I have good reason to beware
of spies. One may have nothing to conceal, and
yet object to those gentry! As to defying and
insulting your servants, sire, they must have taken
small offence indeed, since I have had no challenge
from any among them. All the world knows that
an outraged gentleman may seek redress with his
own right arm, instead of lodging a complaint with
the grand provost. If there is some one who de-
sires satisfaction, I am quite ready to proffer it to
him, at the point of my sword. It is weary of tire
sheath, and only asks to see the light of day! "
" That is not the real issue, my hot Crusader,"
interrupted Rene', secretly satisfied by the other's
open and martial reply. " The Saracens have
given you too good practice! and I am no whit
anxious to have you split and cleave my excellent
subjects. What is the meaning of this uprising
of the tenantry of Fougereuse ? "
" I wished to speak about them to Your Majesty.
The poor fellows are deeply attached to their lord:
they could not bear to think he was in trouble
without endeavoring to relieve him. They are
armed at present with nothing worse than cudgels,
if Beauvau will permit me to make that statement.
<pb>
They have marched to Angers in a body, to in-
quire whether Guy has been shut in the tower by
the order of the King, or merely by the whim of
the seneschal. Now what shall I tell them ? "
" Of all the impudent questions ever asked since
the world began !" cried Philip de Beauvau in a
transport of rage. " Since when have I to render
an account of myself in the discharge of my office ?
I do my duty; and the King my master will not
disclaim me."
" I should never offer you such an affront,
Philip," responded Rene. " Nevertheless, I should
have preferred less haste in so serious a matter.
Your zeal was too active."
" Active rather than commendable, sire, you will
allow me to add," continued Villepreux boldly.
" What a spectacle for our nobility, to see its virtue
treated as rag and bobtail! Is the chivalry of
Anjou fallen so low that its membership must be
searched, because somewhere there is a traitor ?
The King faints, they say, the King is dying, the
King must have been poisoned! and it is upon
us that suspicion lights! The word is spoken to
arrest — whom? Not a valet, not a spy, not a
stranger nor a poor Jew, but the very noblest and
best among us, the man to whom you gave unique
distinction when you allowed him to rank as your
friend: the baron Guy de Fougereuse. What had
he done to deserve his fate? During the six years
when he enjoyed constant favor at his prince's
side, did any man ever find a flaw in his honor ?
<pb>
Did he enrich himself with royal gifts, or with
bribes from place-hunters? Were there intervals
when he laid by his devotion to the King ? Who
among you can convict him of a meanness? You
do not answer, gentlemen! You who praised so
once the fidelity, disinterestedness, courage, jus-
tice, of the minister, you have not a syllable to
utter in defence of the prisoner. It does not seem
strange to you that a brave knight should sigh in
chains, while an intriguing alien, an upstart of the
vilest origin, enjoys his freedom, and holds be-
tween his fingers our most precious concern: the
health, the life of our sovereign. Were I sene-
schal of Anjou, sire, it is possible that the tower
dungeon would not be empty: but I swear to
you that the name of its occupant would not be
Fougereuse! "
"Pasques-Dieu! " cried Cornelius, who was as
ready at an oath as the King of France himself,
"are you in a high fever, sir knight? Is it my
personality which you mean to designate by those
gross epithets? Dare you to hint that you con-
sider me guilty of the infamous act of treason,
from which my skill alone has saved my royal
patient ? Were it so " —
"No threats, minion!" Robert rejoined coldly.
" I did not name you: you are proclaiming your-
self. Surely, it is permissible to feel astonished,
when, so soon as the entire city rings with the ciy
of poison, doubts accumulate on the head of the
soldier, and never so much as graze the charlatan."
<pb>
" Charlatan ! I! " shouted Cornelius, purple
with wrath, and losing all self-control. " Dearly
shall you atone for this blow, my able beheader of
Saracens ! Know that you are dealing with the
pupil of Master Coictiers, the chief physician of
His Majesty Louis XI., with the friend of Oliver
le Daim" —
" And a colleague of Tristram 1'Heremite," con-
cluded Villepreux. " I should advise you not to
boast of your friendships: they smell of the gal-
lows-tree. Behold, sire, the man chosen to replace
your faithful Antonio, that noble nature, that true
hero of science, who went proudly into voluntary
banishment rather than endure such inferiority for
rival. It is a sad thing for those who love you,
to see your present councillors so different from
the men who once surrounded you. Instead of
Antonio, this Cornelius; instead of Fougereuse, a
Walter de Maulny ! "
" Villepreux! " said Maulny, " thank your stars
that you are in the royal presence. Save for the
respect due to our venerated monarch, I " —
" Enough! " interposed the King, with a gesture
of command. " That due respect seems to be for-
gotten by all here, and I would recall it to you.
Master Cornelius, I do not for a moment question
your fidelity."
" And why, sire ? " asked Robert. " Because he
is the friend of Oliver le Daim? "
" You take too great liberties, Villepreux ! " said
Rene, frowning. " I have been patient with you :
<pb>
more patient, perhaps, than befits my dignity. But
you must know that I cannot tolerate this constant
provocation offered to those of my household, nor
your remonstrances against my choice of associates.
I excuse your outbursts, because I am aware what
you suffer in contemplating the fate of Fougereuse.
But I am showing him an undeserved indulgence.
I have just promised Isabelle that I will pardon
him, whenever he frankly reveals his dark secrets.
I permit his cell to be thrown open, from to-day
on, to any of his friends who will have the charity
to visit him ; and I rely upon them to persuade
him to repentance. I am according him all that I
can, for the sake of his father, and of his own past
services. But you presume too far, my lord of
Villepreux, in coming hither to menace my sene-
schal under my very eyes. And it is only a foolish
piece of bravado to maintain, thus obstinately, the
entire innocence of that unfortunate man. Proofs
are at hand ; and they are overwhelming."
" May I dare ask my liege what these proofs
are ? Are they worth the pledge which Guy gave
me of his innocence ? Would you see me thus
defending him, if I had not absolute certitude that
he is free from blame ? "
" Fougereuse has given you some pledge, then!"
the King repeated, while Maulny repressed a ges-
ture of surprise and apprehension. "Of what
were we dreaming? I might have remembered
that the Lion of Villepreux is not the man to
stake his soul on hearsay and unknown quantities.
<pb>
Speak! What do you know ? What evidence
have you ? "
" The word of honor of Guy de Fougereuse ! "
Robert replied proudly. " Sire, it never errs."
"Is this your pledge, your only pledge? "
"The only one. It suffices me."
" It would suffice no other!" cried Philip de
Beauvau. '"The word of honor of Guy de Fou-
gereuse !' Does not every suspect swear that he is
above reproach ? It is but toying with us, to proffer
us such coin."
"What does the King think?" continued Robert,
taking a step towards Rene. "Is the oath of a
knight worthless in his eyes ? If you would have
me go bail for Guy's sincerity, I do so without
fear. I am ready to " —
" Heigh-ho, my brave Lion," sighed Rene": "you
belong to Palestine."
A smile danced on every lip. Maulny's expres-
sion was malicious, triumphant, and meant to drive
Villepreux mad.
"Even so, sire," said the intrepid friend, cross-
ing his arms over his breast, and looking down upon
his companions, from his giant height. " I realize
that you have foredoomed Fougereuse. Any move
against him is legitimate, but to fight for him is to
confess one's self a fool. Well: I shall stand stead-
fast, nevertheless, though I become involved in his
own disgrace. I have but one more word to add,
before I take my leave. In those two at your side,
Cornelius and Maulny, you have two sworn ene-
<pb>
mies of my unhappy comrade. Their hatred does
not date from yesterday; their measures to ruin
him are perfectly plain. I also have ' proofs '! I
also can denounce traitors ! What have you to
answer, Walter, when I ask " —
" I appeal to his Majesty! " Maulny exclaimed.
" He knows that I could not hesitate to choose
between my noble prince and my ignoble relative.
It was painful to me to turn light in upon the in-
trigues of a member of my own family. But per-
ish all my line, before I perjure my vassal's faith! "
"There are witnesses to the fact that Fouge-
reuse bewitched the King," Cornelius announced.
"It is certified that in the house of the dead sor-
cerer, Wolfram, he concocted philters and bever-
ages which " —
" Leech! " Villepreux addressed him with with-
ering scorn. " Leech! as I said once before, you
are a viper. And you — O Judas de Maulny! "
" Rebel and conspirator that you are !" cried the
angry knight. " All this rhodomontade is but a
mask for your own conduct. You will not deny
having harangued the people in the Cathedral
square, this morning, exhorting them to demand
' Baron Guy's' release. Neither will you deny
having declared your intention to oppose, with an
armed force, the execution of the royal mandate,
in case Fougereuse shall be condemned. Twenty
gentlemen who heard you are prepared so to
testify!"
" This is going beyond all bounds ! " Robert pro-
<pb>
tested. " But I ought to know what to expect
from Guy's enemies. You would strike anew at
him through me, his last defender. So be it! I
will not stoop to cleanse myself of a stain which
cannot cling to me. I understand you, hypocrites
and felons! You stand here to represent those
who clamored of old for the death of the Just One.
' What evil hath fie done ?' No matter ! 'Crucify
Him, crucify Him!' My liege, once again: will
you yield to an envious, heartless faction? Is it
worthy of Your Majesty to play, at their beck, the
role of Herod or of Pilate ? "
Rene of Anjou arose, as a ruler before one who
braves his authority; as an old man before one
who respects not his gray hairs. " Insubordinate !
Is it thus you talk in the presence of jour sove-
reign ? Dare you so far outrage him, that you com-
pare with him the wicked murderers of Christ ?
Never has a like insult been offered me, even in
my day of bitterest trouble. You have deserved
death. I commute it to banishment. Go! De-
part hence, and let Anjou behold you no more.
Obey, I say! "
"Sire, I obey. My King shall never again see
the subject he has charged with rebellion. And
before I go, I desire to restore whatever I received.
I renounce the tenure of Villepreux, and I am no
more now than the captain of my horsemen, my
Thieves. Here is the collar of the Order of the
Crescent, which I throw at your feet. And finally,
here is Hauteclaire, the sword with which you
<pb>
yourself armed me when I was made your knight!
I beg you to accept it, for your royal hand alone
has the right to take it from me."
Dropping on one knee, Villepreux drew his
blade from the scabbard, and presented it respect-
fully to the offended King, who declined it by a
gesture. " Keep it," he said, " I do not recall my
gifts. A pretended submission serves but to
aggravate your fault. Sheathe your sword!"
" Not so, sire. Hauteclaire has never been drawn
save in your service, and has never retired save
with glory. If you reject her, let her perish! for
death was ever better than shame." And Robert,
taking the steel in both hands, bent it across his
knee, and with a single effort, broke it off. short,
next the hilt. " Farewell, Hauteclaire! " he said
feelingly, " and farewell, my liege !" He rose up,
and adding, " May God preserve you! " walked out
of the chamber, his step firm, his chin held high,
his look controlled, and proudly sad. Reu6's at-
tendants turned aside. But Prince Edward grasped
his hand as he went by, and the old King's eyes
followed his disgraced vassal, who withdrew with-
out having turned his head.
When he had disappeared, Rene" of Anjou fell
back, exhausted, into his ducal armchair. " All,
all!" he murmured. " Antonio, Fougereuse, Ville-
preux ! they all forsake me, one by one. ... I
shall die friendless and alone."
At this juncture a page arrived at the threshold,
announcing that the University students in a body
<pb>
solicited the pleasure of presenting to his Majesty
their congratulations on his happy recovery. Rene
rose with a brisk effort, and steadied himself upon
the arm of the young heir of England, saying,
" Come, child ! these faithful youths will be our
consolation. . . . Page, usher the students into
the gallery, for I am fain to see them all, and for-
get my griefs and vexations in their company."
On leaving the palace, Villepreux hurried to the
tower cell, which was henceforth open to the friends
of Fougereuse. Guy and Isabelle were seated to-
gether. Her fair head bowed on his shoulder, she
wept bitterly, for he was gently withstanding her
every plea. The hermit and Lo'ic, retired to the
crack-like window, were talking in undertones.
Villepreux, pale and excited, came into the shad-
owy room, seeking the beloved prisoner whom
he had so bravely and so disastrous^ tried to vin-
dicate. Guy, perceiving "him, uttered a cry of joy,
and advanced to greet him; but Robert, with a
great sob heaving his breast, took him in both arms.
" What is it ? What is the matter, my lord of
Villepreux?" cried Isabelle, stricken with mortal
terror.
" Why such emotion, dear friend ? Does it mean
that I am to be executed at once ? " asked Guy.
"All is lost," Villepreux answered; "and lost
through my fault. Guy, I am an attainted and
banished man."
<pb>
" You, Robert! " . . . " You, my lord of Ville-
preux ! " exclaimed the others in the cell.
" Call me not the lord of Villepreux: my lands
are no longer mine. I have given up my fief, and
renounced my allegiance. At this moment I pos-
sess no domain, no castle, no inheritance. They
accused me of treason, their King sends me into
exile; his orthodox subjects look on me as muti-
nous, and my renown is sullied. The lord of Ville-
preux is dead: you see in me the knight Robert,
commandant of the Penitent Thieves. But I could
bear it all, Guy, if my degradation did not involve
you. Let me snatch you from this accursed dun-
geon ! Let us flee our ungrateful Anjou and its
blinded monarch, and go to found, in Jerusalem, a
barony of the Holy Sepulchre. And I make oath
I will never again expose myself to the reproach
of having returned from Palestine ! "
"Robert, my friend! . . . Robert, calm your-
self. What is all this about? . . . Is it credible?
Is it possible ? Are you in earnest ? "
" Am I in earnest! " said Villepreux, after him,
pointing to the empty scabbard at his side. " Look,
Guy: I have broken Hauteclaire in two!" And
Guy, with genuine consternation, learned of the
violent scene between his friend and the King,
and all that had resulted from it.
" My poor Lion, what have you done ! " he ex-
claimed, when Robert had finished his tale. " God
grant that the good King may be willing to pardon
you!"
<pb>
" I have no need of his pardon, Fougereuse, but
only of yours. It was my anger which lost the
cause I hoped to win. Oh, I was mad! That
demon Maulny, and that serpent of a Cornelius,
drove me out of myself; and even Rene of Anjou
refused to believe me, when I pledged my faith
for yours. Why will he accredit the guilty, and
refuse justice to the innocent? How can he ar-
raign for treason, and for commerce with hell,
the most loyal knight and the best Christian in
his duchy? Should I lose you, Guy, my life would
be nothing worth. If they convict you, I will
follow you to death!"
" My lord Robert! " murmured Isabelle.
"If they convict me," Guy answered gently,
dragging up the massive chains as he placed his
hand in that of his friend, " then that will not be
the time for you to follow me to death. I need
you for my survivor: while you breathe on, I shall
not utterly die. Now hear me out. My will is
made, and I have appointed you my heir. No
protest, Robert! Should you wish me to prefer
my cousin de Maulny? I speak neither of my
wealth nor my estate: things sure to be confis-
cated when I perish. But I bequeathe to you my
honor, and the vindication of my memory. I be-
queathe to you two devoted spirits whom adversity
could not drive from their master's side : Vincent
Govier, and Loic de Kernis. The equerry is a
veteran soldier, who can be of splendid service.
Lo'ic (you know him), is a child: but in that
<pb>
roguish breast beats a fine heart, and you, far
better than I, will be able to make of him a perfect
knight. Lo'ic, do not cry out! I am not separating
you from me, in giving you my second self to love
and serve; I count upon you to be true to him.
Robert, will you take the legacy? "
"Yes: before God who hears us!" said Robert
in an altered voice.
"My friend, I do thank you! There is one
precious jewel more, •which is dearer than all to
me: my sister. My death will leave her alone
in the world, without" —
"Oh, no! not while I live! " Villepreux's voice
was full of vehemence, and the girl, in a torrent
of fresh tears, threw herself into her brother's
arms.
" Guy, you break my heart! What could I do
without you? Let me enter the convent, and pray
for you there to my dying day! "
"Did you hear that, Robert? The child is in
such low spirits, since Maulny besought the King
for her hand! She thinks she can never put bar-
riers enough between herself and that unwelcome
aspirant!"
"Maulny!" Villepreux exclaimed, straighten-
ing himself where he stood in the middle of the
dim cell: " how hard honor and justice find it to
live in the same universe with that man ! Maulnj-!
Our only truce with him will be when I have
stretched him in his grave. A malison on the
traitor! Hell is too efood for him! "
<pb>
"Do not say such a thing, my lord! " Isabelle
implored. " And you, brother dear, why do you
begrudge to me the peace of the cloister, and the
grace of God there ? "
"Because it is your sorrow which urges you thus
to seek shelter, Isabelle; and not the call of Christ
which urges you to choose Him for your portion
forever. Not so should one give one's self to
God. But have no fear: Our Lady will send you
a defender. Would that before I leave this world
I might see you betrothed to a lover worthy of
you! Tell me, Isabelle, have you never favored
any of those young nobles who " —
" Do not mention them to me." She spoke reso-
lutely, raising her head, and looking straight into
her brother's eyes. " They have abandoned you,
abused you, belied you ! Never picture me as the
wife of one of those cowardly wretches ! "
" Very well, my darling. You demand a hero,
and I shall not set myself against that. There
was a hero once, to whom I tendered your hand in
vain."
The girl flushed, and turned away. " Guy, I
entreat you ! " whispered Villepreux, evidently in
agony. " This is neither the time nor the place "—
"I am the best judge of that," Fougereuse said.
" Listen to me, Isabelle. You know how, for gen-
erations, the head of our house maintained a feud
with a rival race ? "
" I know," his sister admitted, very low.
" Until the last descendant of that race," contin-
<pb>
ued Guy, " and the last one of ours came to feel
that between the two there had been enough blood-
shed. And I went to my foeman, a stripling then
like myself; and I was received nobly and frankly,
and we swore to forget the past. And we planned
an alliance which should forever unite us. You
were very young, and I promised to plight you to
my new friend and yours. When he visited Fou-
gereuse, you were his princess always, and he your
vassal. But the time came when, of his own free
will, he gave me back my word."
"Guy, I say! Let me justify myself!" cried
Robert.
" ' This is neither the time nor the place!' Let
me finish. He gave me back my word, because he
was not willing, he said, to take advantage of the
inexperience of a child of your age, to hold you
bound to any such promise. He aspired to win
the voluntary love of her whom he should wed.
Your dower was a rich one, and you had many
suitors, while my odd friend fled to Palestine, as
if to escape you and your fortune. But he loved
you, and he kept silence with his whole strength,
because he believed himself unworthy to occupy
your thoughts. . . . You know the rest, Isabelle.
You have seen this valiant knight, unaided, defend-
ing the honor and the life of his hereditary foe.
You have heard him declare himself ready, for my
sake, to end his own stainless career in an oppro-
brious death. He stands before you, cashiered,
exiled, for having espoused with too great warmth
<pb>
your brother's cause. And notwithstanding all
this, he will not venture to reclaim his little sweet-
heart."
" No ! " Villepretix broke in ; " God forbid, my
lady, that I should throw into the balance the
affection I have for Guy ! I beg you to ignore it.
I should not wish gratitude, nor the sense of any
pact made long ago, to influence a maid in my
favor. I have no domain, no wealth, no glory, not
even my sword. I could not make you mistress of
Villepreux, you whom I once dreamed of crowning
Queen of Jerusalem ! Were you still the great
heiress that you were, I should not have allowed
Guy to speak for me. But you, like me, are per-
secuted and poor, and, like me, menaced with the
loss of your dearest and best: therefore will I lay
now at your feet the passion and devotion of my
whole life. Let me tell you in this dark hour, and
once for all, how I have loved you ! You have
ruled my very soul within me, and Heaven alone
knows to what holy ends ! As a child, you taught
me a lesson of mercy in coming to intercede for
some peasants who had transgressed. You opened
to feelings of pity and tenderness, my heart which
is naturally hard and wild. Every time, far off in
Palestine, that I spared a foe, pardoned a rebel,
redeemed a captive, or exhorted a renegade to re-
pent — O Isabelle ! I did it for you. I longed to
awake your pride in the exploits of the warrior,
and still more, to make you happy by the deeds of
the Christian. The memory of your presence fol-
<pb>
lowed me like my guardian angel, and warded me
from evil: be you blessed for it all! I never
nursed the folly of thinking you could care for me.
I shall never murmur, if you would keep your
liberty in your own hands. But my fate is there
too. Decide it for me, and without fear. If
Robert de Villepreux cannot hope to be your hus-
band, he will still remain your brother, your friend,
your leal knight, to his dying breath."
While Robert was speaking, Isabelle turned,
little by little, towards him. She had listened
silently to his manly, self-forgetful plea. Sincere,
frank, blunt as it was, it was filled with the gen-
tle spirit of sacrifice. The girl's whole attitude
changed. Her drooping head straightened itself
proudly ; her eyes began to shine under their still
moist lashes; and the look on her young face was
noble and grave.
"My lord of Villepreux," she said, as Rdbert
knelt before her to hear her decision, "my lord of
Villepreux, you and I have nothing to do with
light and idle talk. My truthfulness shall be
equal to yours. If you would owe your bride
neither to some debt of thankfulness, nor to some
assurance given in her name; if you wish to leave
her to the free choice of her heart " —
There Isabelle's voice failed her. She stopped
in despite of herself, and reddened, and breathed
hard. Villepreux's forehead bent lower, like that
of a man who resigns himself to the death-sentence.
" Well, my dear one," Guy prompted her, "what
<pb>
must become of Villepreux, if he would owe his
bride to the free choice of her heart ?"
The sister laid her little trembling hand in her
brother's. "Then let him receive this hand from
you Guy! and tell him that I had vowed it should
never be given to any other."
"Robert," Fougereuse continued solemnly, "here
is my last legacy, my treasure. I pass it to him
who is worthiest."
The young man pressed to his lips, again and
again, the hand so sweetly accorded him. He
could not answer. What joyful endearments could
the two exchange in the air of that sombre room ?
What hopeful future smiled on them in the divine
moment when their brother leagued them together,
standing at the brink of the grave? But Isabelle
and Robert had found each other in the day of
sorrow, and their love was to strengthen in the
shadow of the Cross.
" Come, my Father," Guy called to the hermit,
"come and consecrate this betrothal by the pre-
liminary rite of the Church. Isabelle must be able
to say to the King: ' Sire, I am bound before God.' "
The aged monk came forward, and after a short,
simple exordium, he questioned the lovers. The
vows were pronounced, two rings were blessed
and made to serve, and their lives were joined in a
sacred link which no human power could break.
''Noel!" cried Lo'ic. "Honor to the affianced
wife of the Lion ! And may that fox of a Maulny
die now of rage and spite ! "
<pb>
<pb>
Fougereuse silenced the enfant terrible with a
gesture. Then he embraced Isabelle, holding her
long against his breast, and at last he placed his
sister's hand again in that of his friend.
" Take her, Robert, my brother; she is yours.
The feud between us is indeed destroyed. May
the Lord God Himself be our bond of union, and
cement forever the alliance between your line and
ours! . . . Good-by, Isabelle. I confide you, with-
out one fear, to your Lionheart. Tell the King
that my last thought" —
". Guy, why should you talk thus ? " Villepreux
remonstrated. "Have you sworn to act like a
defenceless sheep, who runs to death ? I shall not
suffer it. My Thieves are mine yet, and I and they
will attempt to save you, be it by attacking the
royal troops, contending for your life with the
very executioner, or snatching you alive from
the burning stake ! "
"Isabelle," said her brother, "rather shall you
be my ambassadress, since the King appears to
have preserved his good will towards you. Here
is a ring which he gave me, in a moment of friendly
confidence. He engaged never to refuse any re-
quest of mine, should this be presented to him in
my name. I will intrust it to you. Bring it to
His Majesty, and add only this: ' Sire, Fouge-
reuse claims the performance of the royal promise:
he demands to be heard before he is condemned.'
Go: and God be with you. And you, Father, be
pleased to return to the Right Reverend Abbot,
<pb>
and report to him what you have seen; for the
hour to act is at hand."
Within a few moments, Robert, the lady Isa-
belle, and the hermit had quitted the prison.
Hours later, Artauld entered.
"Messire, the captain of the guards is outside,
to escort you to your audience with the King. Do
you wish me to take off your chains? I can obtain
permission."
" Be careful, Artauld. They were put upon me
in the King's name, and the King alone may strike
them off. I follow you as I am."
" You there, Alanik! Come out and get a little
air," called the jailer to the page, who cleared the
room at a single bound. It was a strange and
painful experience for the captive to have to cross
the court of the ducal palace, once the scene of his
triumphs, surrounded by a guard, and loaded with
chains. So short a time before, every one would
still have saluted the King's favorite. But now
heads turned away, or derisive comment arose.
Glory yesterday, and to-day humiliation! The
flatterers of yore contemned the object of their
flattery: the ancient office-seekers were arrogant
and cold. The blight which rested on Fougereuse
cleared a great empty space around him; it was
due partly to a superstitious terror of the magi-
cian, partly to the natural avoidance of a disgraced
culprit. The captain, meanwhile, and his men
did not hesitate to show themselves kindly dis-
posed towards the prisoner. The rough warriors
<pb>
knew the prowess of the sword of Fougereuse, and
had some feeling for the gallant chief who had led
them into action. Those hearts whose profession
it is to invite death and to bestow it on the field,
deal not in mean exactions and useless cruelties.
Soldiers, and not executioners, they were open to
sentiments of compassion and of respect for mis-
fortune. Guy's own attitude was well calculated to
affect them. Though he walked wearily, owing to
the weight of his chains, he carried them without
embarrassment. Calm, dignified, unboastful, indif-
ferent to what was passing around him, the accused
knight went by: never was there a nobler figure.
" Nothing seems to disturb him," some of the
guard murmured. " If there is a demon in his
body, it is a demon prodigiously brave! "
Just as Fougereuse arrived with his escort, noises
began to echo in the court of honor. A ragged
throng surged beneath the palace balcony, acclaim-
ing the well-beloved monarch, who had consented
to show himself for a few minutes, notwithstanding
his still feeble condition.
" Long live King Rene ! Praise unto God who
has healed him! Our duke forever! Noel to
Queen Joan! " cried the poor townspeople, who
had come to celebrate the King's recovery. All of
a sudden there fell a hush, as of recollection, on
the crowd, whose beseeching hands stretched them-
selves towards the window; they bent the knee
and bowed the head in supplication, and a single
cry leaped loud from many throats:
<pb>
" Baron Guy ! Give us back Baron Guy! "
" Justice and freedom for Fougereuse! " cho-
rused the students, who at that instant trooped
down the great outer steps.
" Sire, sire! Baron Guy! "
Rene stood up quickly, casting an irritated
glance at the gathering below, and withdrew to his
rooms, without deigning to answer. But the pop-
ulace kept to its demand: hundreds of voices re-
peated ever more warmly and boldly :
" Concede it to us, sire! We must have our
Baron Guy! "
Then the students caught sight of Fougereuse,
and ran to meet him, waving their caps and shout-
ing:
" Noel to the prisoner! Down with the sene-
schal ! Good folk, here is Baron Guy! "
The kneeling crowd started, sprang up with
cheers, and rushed upon Fougereuse. The little
band of soldiery was overborne, and Fougereuse
himself was nearly suffocated. The bystanders
kissed his hands and his garments; they examined
his manacles, weeping and protesting angrily.
They offered to deliver him at once; they offered
to carry him in triumph into the roj-al presence.
Fougereuse withstood gently this humane excite-
ment, refused all aid or interference, declared that
Ren 6 was prepared to give him fair play, and suc-
ceeded somewhat in quieting the general delirium.
" Men of Angers," he said to those nearest him,
" are you truly my friends ? "
<pb>
" Are we ? For life or death! "
" Very well, then; what are you doing here ?
You have besought my earthly sovereign in my
behalf; recommend me now to the King of Heaven!
I once made a vow to Saint Magdalen: hasten to
remind her of it, in her own chapel at Baumette.
Follow them, gentlemen of the University! "
Docile to their orders, the multitude retreated
through the gates, intoning litanies for the weal of
Baron Guy, not indeed understanding perfectly
what had sent them in that direction, but acting
instinctively together, as mobs will do. The guards
closed in again around their singular captive, who
awaited them with a smile, and the ducal doors
were swung wide before them.
The gallery leading to the King's private apart-
ments was filled with courtiers hostile to Fou-
gereuse. He expected to make an all too leisurely
passage under the fire of their sarcasms, their whis-
pers, their disdainful gaze. A sort of malicious
curiosity shone in every eye. At the entrance to
the gallery Guy had paused for an instant, as if
gauging what warfare lay before him. His head
erect, his face perfectly serene, inexpressive either
of pride or of suffering, he advanced, dragging his
chains over the marble tiles as carelessly as if he
were trailing after him a velvet mantle. But as
he went he brought his slow significant look to
bear upon face after face, and more than one
turned aside with heightened color. His penetrat-
ing glance, full now of "sadness and pity, sad as a
<pb>
reproach, pitying as a forgiveness, was that of a
judge reading the consciences of men, and condemn-
ing the disloyal to the pain of their own remorse.
Murmurs died away, a few heads were bowed; not
one insult was proffered the prisoner, as he marched
through the ranks of his enemies. The King was
pacing to and fro in his own room, when young
Paul de Fleurenville announced the baron of
Fougereuse.
" Let him enter," was the reply.
The curtain was lifted, and Fougereuse appeared
on the threshold. His eyes met those of the King,
nor did they droop under that severe scrutiny.
The aged monarch, standing with his fingers rest-
ing on the carved back of a high chair, silently
confronted his former minister, who came forward
fearlessly, yet with no presumption, sure of his
cause. The royal attendants ceased their conver-
sation, and moved aside, interested in a decisive
audience whose issue they could not foresee. The
subject saluted his sovereign on bended knee, but
arose at once, and remained on his feet, in a defer-
ent but resolute attitude. Rene was painfully
impressed at the sight of the iron gyves; they
weighed upon him rather than upon their wearer.
A melancholy expression crept over his changeful
features, and drove all wrath away.
" You wished to speak with me, did you not,
Fougereuse ?" he began in more sympathetic ac-
cents than his present position called for. " In the
faithful performance of a promise made to the
<pb>
friend of long ago, I yield to the claim of the per-
vert of to-day. What would you say to me that
can excuse or mitigate your transgressions?"
" Sire, before I enter upon any defence of myself,
allow me to lay at your feet the expression of my
joy, and also an apology. For my joy is very
great to see your health return. The sharpest
pang I knew in my cell, was when I feared for
the life of my venerated liege. And it is to my
regret, my sincere and profound regret, that I
learn how I was the innocent cause of an offence
to your Majesty. I have seen Robert de Ville-
preux " —
At the name, the King frowned, and made a
little gesture of vexation. " First Villepreux," he
said, " then the students; and lastly a siege of
beggars. Baron, you have a hot set of partisans!
I would to Heaven they had as much awe of their
ruler as they have ardor for the promotion of
your interests."
" I beseech you, sire, to make allowances for
those who are too true to a disadvantaged man.
If some one must atone for their misdeed, I am at
hand: strike me alone. The quick-tempered youth
of the schools, and the poor honest working-people,
acted without premeditation, and in the heat of
their generous concern for a prisoner. Villepreux
. . . you know the Lion, sire? No vassal of yours
is more deeply devoted to you. But he is used to
the camp rather than to the court; a little spurt of
feeling carried him away. His crime is to have
<pb>
loved too well a friend cast into disgrace, and to
have forgotten that he was addressing his sove-
reign, and not a comrade-in-arms. Or rather, he
never dreamed at all, in his strong veneration for
his master, that his soldier-like rudeness of speech
could be laid to deliberate discourtesy. Is it an
irredeemable fault? Consider, sire, what Robert
has had to bear, almost ever since his return from
the Holy Land, in hearing his closest companion
constantly maligned! Consider what his thoughts
must have been during those days when everything
conspired to make him expect the death of his
prince, the execution of his friend! Remember
that he himself was accused before you of felony
and of rebellion, and pardon him if the blood of
his ancestors mutinied in his veins! The Lion's
spoken word may have been lacking in respect,
but his heart has never wavered from its alle-
giance. To-morrow he will be ready, as he was
ready yesterday, to die for you! My liege lord, I
implore you, estrange not from yourself such ser-
vants as he."
"Is it to plead for your associates that you
asked for this audience ? " said Rene", ill-pleased.
"Have you nothing to urge in your own behalf?"
" Before I think of myself, I must think of my
King. It is my duty to repeat to him, for the last
time: ' Beware of Louis of France; beware of his
creatures I' "
Guy had lowered his voice, but Cornelius heard,
trembled, and endeavored to protest. Fougereuse
<pb>
appeared not to have noticed him, and the King
hushed him with a movement and a look. Then,
turning towards the fallen favorite, he said, in a
sorrowful, fretful old voice: " Baron de Fouge-
reuse, you abuse my patience. Answer the accusa-
tions brought against you."
".I must know them first! I was thrown into
prison on the suspicion of poisoning. I made oath
that I was guiltless, before the entire court. After-
wards it was admitted that your Majesty's swoon
came from another cause. What more can I say? "
" They charge you with black magic, with witch-
craft, with damnable operations " —
" That I might win and keep the affections of my
King!" Fougereuse finished the sentence. " Let
it be his part to declare whether his friendship for
me was due to Satanic influences, or whether it was
his own free gift."
"Your proceedings speak against you. Wolf-
ram's house, your secret room at home " —
" Without lock or key: oh, aggravating circum-
stance ! How does that affect me ? Has not your
Majesty a private closet where the profane cannot
enter, and where your master-illuminators do their
work?"
" The disappearance of Vincent and of Lo'ic after
your arrest" —
" Vincent and Lo'ic are not so far but that I can
summon them to reappear, not as the accomplices
of a sorcerer, but as the witnesses of an innocent
man. I am quoting the words of my cousin Walter
<pb>
de Maulny, since your Majesty chooses to rehearse
his indictments of me. Am I to suppose that on
such grounds my sovereign condemns me without
appeal?"
" I demand the truth, Fougereuse ! " said Rene,
fixing his bright eyes upon the prisoner. "You
cannot deny that there is something to conceal in
your career."
" Ah, that is my real crime! " cried the young
baron bitterly. " I will state to my King what I
have stated to my comrade-in-arms: that I have
indeed something to conceal, and that I am under
vow not to make it known ; but that my conscience
and my honor are without a stain. Villepreux was
satisfied, sire, with this much; yet you know him
to be hard to satisfy in all such matters."
" But I will not be satisfied with it! " cried the
King testily. " My toleration is exhausted. On
your allegiance, vassal, I order you to reveal to me
your life's secret! On that condition I will par-
don you."
" Have I not explained to your Majesty that my
solemn oath obliges me to be mute?"
" It is a lie! " rejoined Ren6, transported with his
vexation. " I do not believe you. You are trying
to evade the acknowledgment of your guilt,
haughty Fougereuse! But I will be deceived no
longer. My eyes are at last open to all your
intrigues."
At the word " lie" Guy straightened himself
in his chains, and there was a lightning flash in his
<pb>
eyes. He contained himself, however, by a sheer
effort of the will, and these words alone fell from
his lips: " I pity you, my liege!" For in a
silence which was to last several minutes, the aged
King had thrown himself into a chair, and sunk
his head in his hands, as if exhausted with his
emotions.
Fougereuse, still as a statue, wore his most im-
passive expression, and schooled himself not to
give way at all. It was a trying hour for both.
The incidents of the long, painful day drawing to
its close, had drawn upon the physical strength
and the patience of the convalescent old man. He
who had been so paternally gentle with Isabelle,
so noble and calm with Villepreux, so benignant
toward the students, until their insistence had
tired him out, had been, nevertheless, deeply hurt
by the lively demonstration of his poorer subjects.
These friends of the prisoner had bequeathed to
him the consequences of the irritation they had
awakened. It was on their account, in short, that
Fougereuse found the mood of the judge so soon
replace that of the indulgent master, in Rene" of
Anjou. As for Fougereuse, his own soul was
heavy with disgust at the perfidy of the court, and
the faithless conduct of Walter; he was full of
bitterness, and by no means disposed to comport
himself humbly. Attacked on every side, and with
his very sovereign prepossessed against him, Guy
stood upon the defensive, and refused to take one
step towards conciliation.
<pb>
Cornelius and the seneschal approached the King,
but he repelled them with a feverish animation.
"Bid every one retire!" he commanded, "and let
none be so bold as to approach without an express
summons. Come here, Fougereuse! . . . Nearer!
. . . Well, listen. I saw what impeded you. You
did not wish to talk before those others. Now we
are alone, and out of hearing of the indiscreet. Do
not harden your heart in this obstinate pride of
yours. Speak without fear; whatever you say to
your King goes no farther. Can I push my clem-
ency to greater lengths than I do ? "
" Alas, sire, I desire only justice. But I thank
your Majesty for your graciousness."
The old man continued, with most persuasive
goodness. " Remember the deeds of your famous
father, Baron Amaurjr; the hereditary loyalty of
your house; the honorable renown of your kin-
dred ; remember your orphan sister, that dear
child, that noble-spirited woman, who begged your
life of me. Would you break her heart? "
" It is because I think of my ancestral past,
because I think of Isabelle's future, that I refuse
to go back on my word. Would not those knights
of old rise from their graves to disown me? And
my sister has herself told me that she would
rather weep at my tomb than to lament my damna-
tion !"
" The dumb demon has taken possession of you.
What strange delusion is upon you? Once you
fall into the hands of the law, your ruin is certain.
<pb>
But I cannot forget that I have loved you, Guy,
and that before you shut me out, you had for me
in return,an all-trustful affection. Even God does
not forgive a sinner, until he shall have confessed
his sin. I offer you, even at this late hour, a
plenary reprieve for one open avowal! Forget
that you are with your King and arbiter, and con-
fide in your old friend. Guy, I long to have you
profit by my good will towards you ! But if you
leave this room without having earned your par-
don, your life is forfeited."
" There are other issues more important than
life. What is it to live if one must live without
honor ? If my King refuses to hold me blameless,
whom can I convince? But no, sire! I must
have misunderstood you, did I not ? " continued
Fougereuse with great feeling. " You are but try-
ing me ; you wish to know how far my courage will
lead me, and learn the true stuff of which my soul
is made. It is a cruel sport, but yet I will not com-
plain. This persistent effort to wrench my secret
from me — what can I think it but a ruse ? For
you do not believe me capable of the deeds of
darkness ; yon would never accuse me of commerce
with the Evil One ; you cannot seriously maintain
that I have woven spells and practised magic!
Look at me : read my face, my eyes, my whole
being. Hear me once more : I tell you that I have
no such flaw in me ! Can I not arouse some faith
in that heart of yours? My royal master, my
well-beloved lord, I would awake whatever chord
<pb>
responsive to my touch is still in the depths of your
soul. Sire, sire ! do but trust my honor ! "
Fougereuse had unconsciously raised his voice.
His last words rang in the great room like a su-
preme, despairing cry. The King, shaken by the
poignant sincerity of things spoken by a conscience
at bay, rose up and turned towards his attendants,
who were far withdrawn.
"Hither, my trusty ones! Come and help to
save a foolish knight who refuses life, oblivion of
the past, restoration to favor! I no longer require
you, Fougereuse, to unbosom yourself of your
secret; only ask for mercy, and you shall receive
it. One word, one sign of regret, and the rest
shall be buried forever! I shall never again recall
these days of error and of folly. Guy, your King
is waiting' for you."
O J
"Yield, Fougereuse, yield, my lord!" exclaimed
the group of courtiers with one voice, carried away
by the compassion and sympathy which the sight
of heroic courage will always inspire.
"Do not play too obstinately the part of Luci-
fer, baron I" said the seneschal. "Be our loyal
yoke-fellow once more. I was loath to proceed
against you."
" Accept the mercy offered ! " the others pleaded
as they came close about the prisoner.
Guy was silent, and tranquil too, amid the gen-
eral excitement. But, nevertheless, aware that
he must put an end to the scene, he took a step
toward Rene.
<pb>
" I will obey you, sire. And since you all wish
it, my comrades, I earnestly implore the King to
accord me " —
" Pardon I " the old monarch interrupted, with
a joyful gesture.
" A trial, sire! "
" A trial! " exclaimed at once the King and his
lords. " This is madness ! "
" I claim my right. When I was apprehended,
I said I should appeal to the royal justice. The
royal justice having failed me, I appeal to a jury
of my peers. And to them my secret shall be
told."
" You shall have your wish, Guy de Fouge-
reuse," answered King Rene". " To-morrow you
shall be tried and judged."
<pb>
CHAPTER IV.
THE TRIBUNAL.
"Judge me, O God! and distinguish my cause from the nation
that is not holy. From the unjust and deceitful man deliver
me, O Lord!" Psalm xlii.
" I HAVE brought you what you wish to wear,
my lord. Your servant followed your instructions
in choosing these garments, and hopes that you
may be satisfied."
"Very well, Artauld: I thank you. Lay the
parcel on the floor. Alanik will help me to
dress."
" They have ordered me to remove your mana-
cles. The King does not wish you to appear in
them before the court, as it gives him pain to see
them. Place your foot on this little stone bench,
my lord, and I will file the iron links."
" I am grateful to his Majesty," replied Fou-
gereuse, obeying the jailer. The latter seemed
impatient to have his captive's fetters fall.
"It is little enough to be grateful for!" mut-
tered Artauld, energetically beginning work on
the circlet which had bruised the baron's right
ankle. " But it is a good omen, in the main ; and
I prefer this mandate to some others."
</div>
<pb>
<div id="the tribunal" code="3" wordcount="21382">
" Did not the servant make some blunder, cous-
in?" asked Lo'ic, who was examining the package
of clothes. " I spy a great many broideries. Sure-
ly, this poor gentleman is not bidden to a feast! "
"What is the little fellow saying?" the jailer
inquired of Guy. "I am a bit deaf. . . . Your
other foot now, my lord. One must not allow
that simpleton to prattle more than is good for
him!" And his eyes, raised for a moment, en-
countered Guy's. Artauld laid a finger on his lip,
furtively, and Fougereuse nodded.
"I cannot understand Low Breton speech, my
good Artauld; but I perceive that your kinsman
does not approve of my costume. That is a mis-
fortune I can hardly bear up under! For I would
have Guy de Fougereuse stand before the tribunal
with head held high, and in the noblest apparel of
his rank. Should my judges acquit me, I would
not receive their welcome verdict in a disorderly
dress. And should they condemn me, I shall have
arrayed the victim! . . . Have you finished ?
Can I walk freely?"
" Just one stroke more of the file, messire . . .
There! It is done. Those villanous chains are
more pleasing to me where they lie, than they
were on your limbs. It is my wish never to have
to rivet them on you again ! "
" Amen ! master Artauld. At what hour ought
I to be ready ? "
" The captain of the guards will come about two
o'clock; he arrives always too early, as you know.
<pb>
Have you aught else to ask? If there were any
service I could render, which is not contrary to
rule "—
" There is none, friend. I am thankful to you
for all your good will. You may go now: Alan
will suffice me."
The inan took a step towards the door; then
suddenly recalling something, he cried: "What
a threefold beast am I ! I was forgetting this."
He drew from his bosom a small box, which he
handed to Fougereuse. " Your vassals sent it to
you. It is a medal which they had blessed on the
altar of Our Lady of Pity, and they wish it may
bring you better fortune. One finds those poor
villains everywhere in the churches, weeping and
praying for the preservation of their lord! It is
truly touching . . . I lit a candle of my own for
you. Be of good courage, my lord!" And the
jailer went quickly out, shutting the door with a
bang.
Fougereuse opened the leaden box, and took out
a medal stamped with the image of Saint Christo-
pher, the great protector against dangers and mor-
tal accidents. " Who sees the saint's face at waking
shall be joyful all the day" ran the quaint inscrip-
tion around the rim. A small piece of parchment,
rolled, and tied with a silken string, slipped out,
and fell to the baron's feet.
" Bring it to me, Lo'ic. Some prayer, I suppose.
. . . May God heed them, my poor villains, as
Artauld calls them! Let us see what their devo-
<pb>
tion has invented. What ? . . . What does this
mean ? . . . Oh, the absurd creatures! " exclaimed
the baron suddenly, crushing the little scroll.
"Imagine me permitting that!"
Lo'ic's big eyes were sparkling with curiosity,
as he came closer to his master. "Pray tell me
what it is, my lord?"
" Have not these simple peasants actually per-
suaded themselves that they can purchase my
liberty by giving hostages ! " Guy continued, half
in tenderness, half in distress; " and such hos-
tages! They offer no fewer than fifty fathers of
families, if that be sufficient! Vincent Govier
approves strongly of all this, yet he made them
send me written word of it, as he was not willing
to have them act without my leave. If I consent,
I have only to wear the medal over my doublet,
where it may be plainly seen. What think you of
the brilliant idea? "
" It is just like that old dunderhead of an equer-
ry !" said Lo'ic, with a most contemptuous shrug
of the shoulders. "As if one ought to go asking
permission for a move like that! The thing to do
is to take it, and let come what may!"
" How now, sir page ? Are these the lessons
you learned of me ? In truth, I do not know what
folly possesses every one of you. It is only a
question which shall sacrifice his blood and his
life for me (things I have no use for!), and dis-
pense himself from all obedience. My old Vin-
cent, at least, has some regard for my wishes. It
<pb>
is fortunate that I hare time to hinder this fine
hecatomb! . . . What have you to say, Lo'ic ? If
you wish to be useful to me, untie that parcel, and
give me my court costume. Make haste. The
captain may come at any moment; and it would be
graceless of me to keep him waiting."
"Ah, if you had only been willing, my lord! "
sighed the page, laying on the straw the separate
portions of a rich suit. " If you had only been
willing!"
" Do not let my scarf trail so on the .floor . . .
Well, if I had been willing. What follows ? "
" You might have been a free man on the soil
of Brittany! Our duke Francis would have re-
ceived you with open arms, and he would have
told you "—
" By all that is idiotic! Will you tease me unto
everlasting, with your regrets for a conspiracy
which was never perfected ? You dreamed of it
all last night; you wasted incredible talk upon it.
Can you not console yourself for having lost the
prospect of being hanged or beheaded, in the com-
pany of your dear students ? . . . I believe this
boy is possessed!"
" It would matter very little whom they hanged
or beheaded! No price would be too high to pay
for the joy of saving you, and of thwarting
Maulny."
" Ah! that is what stirs your soul, is it ? Do
you know, my poor Loi'c, I begin to fear that I
have brought you up very, very badly. . . . Help
<pb>
me with this doublet. I cannot help asking my-
self what Villepreux can do with you when he
becomes your master."
" Villepreux will never be that," answered the
youth, with emphasis.
Guy turned, looked him in the face, frowned,
and asked gravely: " Louis de Kernis, is this a
revolt ? "
" It is not. God forbid, my lord. It is only a
vow which I made. I have sworn never to serve
any knight but you. While you live, I will follow
you anywhere: yea, into exile or imprisonment.
When you die, I shall enter a monastery to pray
for your soul. I have made a vow, as I said be-
fore. That is all there is to it!"
" The saints assist me ! " murmured Guy, vis-
ibly troubled and anxious. " Come here and listen
to reason." The page approached. Fougereuse
placed his two hands on Lo'ic's shoulders, and
gazed into those clear honest eyes which were
lifted fearlessly to his. " My dear child, I am
going to give you pain ; but it is not in my power
to avoid it. Know that, alive or dead, acquitted or
condemned, I must part from you. I must. Do
you comprehend ? "
"My lord!" . . .
"After this, it will be impossible for me to keep
with me my best servants, my dearest friends.
You belong now to Villepreux, who has inherited
all my duties and my rights. Your vow is null and
void ; you can readily be dispensed from it."
<pb>
" I will never cancel it."
"Lo'ic, I exact as much, in the name of your
allegiance! Obey me for the last time. Do not
try to unriddle to-day what will be made plain by
to-morrow."
" I understand that you drive me from you ! "
" You are mistaken. Have confidence in me,
Loic."
" You have the right to drive me away, but not
to give me to another. I will not serve my lord
of Villepreux!"
" But what have you against him ? He is my
choice for you among a thousand. Have I not
confided my own sister to him ? I am not aware
that Isabelle took offence at it! "
" It is different with me." argued Lo'ic, in a
voice trembling with annoyance. " I am not your
brother. I am not your vassal, nor your serf. I
am not your grayhound Fergus ! When you took
me away from Brittany, I followed you of my
own free will. I served you because I loved you :
in all this world I never loved any one but you.
But if my life is yours, my fidelity is my own, to
do what I please with. You may kill me, but you
shall not give me to somebody else ! "
He threw back his head, with the air of a young
lion at bay, shook off his master's touch, and with-
drew a step or two. Guy said nothing. His sad,
compassionate glance was itself a call to peace, to
submission: but Lo'ic's wild nature was too deeply
wounded. " If you had but told me sooner tlftit
<pb>
you were tired of me, I would have rid you of my
presence. Be satisfied now, messire; for you will
see me no more. God forgive you ! " He ended
with a sob, which he did not succeed in repressing.
Guy answered gently: " Amen, Lo'ic."
There was an instant's silence. The child
turned towards his master a look of sorrow and
reproach; then, covering his face with both hands,
he threw himself on the stone bench, and burst
into a torrent of scalding tears. Fougereuse at-
tempted to quiet him, but the other sank deeper
and deeper into his passion of despair.
" Command me to die, but let me die yours! "
he wailed, in the most forlorn accents. " Remem-
ber that you reared me in your house, and will be
responsible for me at the Judgment Day. You
have been more than a friend to me, kinder than
any father; I loved you alone; I existed only to
serve you. Would you make a present of me, as
if I were a horse or a falcon ? "
" Silly boy! " said the baron, shaking him by
the shoulder; " do you know what you are saying?
Mercy on us ! Did any one ever hear a page talk
so to his lord ? Where is your respect, sirrah ? "
Lo'ic threw himself at Guy's feet, contrite and
heart-broken.
" Please pardon me. I did not mean to offend
you! Every fault I ever committed against you
weighs on me like a mountain. Your last impres-
sion of me will be one of disobedience and obsti-
nacy ; and now I have been disrespectful too! I
<pb>
would give every drop of my blood to wash away
the memory of those days of my rebellion, but you
will not let me, any more. If I am too great a care
for you, if you dismiss me from your side, could
you not at least, out of charity, give me shelter
at Fougereuse ? I could sleep on the threshold of
your door; I could groom your horses, or keep
your armor. And if I might sometimes see you
passing by, I could be happy yet. Then by and
by, on the battlefield, I should know how to find
my place again, how to pay my debt! You would
never have to blush for the orphan of the Kernis
line ! "
Guy de Fougereuse was touched. He raised
Lo'ic up, and clasped him in his arms. Hitherto,
the blows aimed at the captive had not disturbed
his empire over himself. But before this affection,
so frank, so warm, and these entreaties, so humbly
poured forth, his heart beat very fast, and his eyes
moistened.
" Take not away my courage and control, Lo'ic,"
he said, " for we shall both have need of them. I
obey a will stronger than my own, in separating
you from me. Yet how can you think ill of your
best friend ? Do not mention your faults again,
for they are forgotten ; all I can recall now is
your dauntless confidence in my honor. You be-
lieved me stainless, when my King himself accused
me, and when even Villepreux needed my oath to
banish his doubt. And for that, beloved child, I
pray God to bless you, as I do bless you, in the
<pb>
name of your father, who was dear to mine. But
as for following me" — Guy hesitated. Lo'ic's
pale, imploring face affected him, and turned the
balance. " Well, I leave you free: and may
Heaven not impute it to me as a weakness ! Do
not exult too soon ! Trial and sentence are yet to
come," he continued, crowding his sentences, and
trying to quell the fiery lad's outburst of joy;
"and then, perhaps, you will ask for time to
reconsider. Meanwhile, count de Kernis, I will
promote you a grade towards knighthood. Be
my page no longer; for I make you an equerry."
Noel!" shouted Lo'ic. "Brittany-Malo! Here
am I, a champion. Let the Devil himself come
on, and I will not budge an inch ! "
" I would not jest so, Lo'ic. Sometimes I ask
myself whether indeed we have not dealings with
the Evil One and his imps, in human guise: the
events of these last few days seem to me so strange.
Maulny might pass for a demon in disguise."
" Maulny would be a pretty disguise for a de-
mon!" the boy replied scornfully. "If I were
Satan, I would get a better mask. This one shows
his face through it! ... Who comes ? I hear
Artauld's keys jingle. Conld it be the guard
already?"
The door opened; a slender, graceful figure
glided into the cold room, and a sweet voice
announced: "Guy! it is I, your sister."
"Isabelle!" exclaimed Fougereuse, embracing
her fondly : " I feared they would not let you come
<pb>
this morning. You are too pale for a betrothed
bride, darling! And why do you shiver? Are
there bad tidings?"
" Speak low, brother. I am here against the
King's command, against even Artauld's wish, to
tell you important news, and bring you a message
from Robert. Every moment of my visit is counted.
The seneschal has given the command to search
your palace."
" That is a prudent measure, and one that, were
I in his place, I should have taken long ago. What
else?"
" You know the house is guarded by the Peni-
tent Thieves and their captain," murmured Isabelle,
raising her blue eyes to her brother's.
" Which is as much as to say that the grand
provost and his bowmen will have a hard time
getting in. What is Robert doing?"
" He awaits orders from you. For nothing in
the world would he allow any man to cross your
threshold, unless by your own consent."
" How proud you are of your Lion, Isabelle!
To offer resistance would be absurd. Let our
Villepreux know that I have no objection to have
them search the house. I dread no discoveries
which they may make."
" Alas, Guy! I would I were as confident as
you are; but you cannot guess what things are
devised against you: lies that I hear every hour
of the day. They say now that the haunted house
at Ponille hides a guest: some call him a sor-
<pb>
cerer, some a poisoner; some will have it that it
is Satan himself. The King means to send down
a company of armed men, to seize the supposed
magician."
" That is a wise precaution, too. There is
naught in it to make you anxious, dear. . . . Well,
well! Here you are in tears."
" Oh, have I not good reason for tears, brother?"
said the girl, between her sobs. " My strength is
gone! All these mysteries, these unknown dan-
gers, this trial you have demanded, this death that
you are braving . . . Guy, Guy, tell me they
will not condemn you ! "
" How can I tell, my poor child? Do you think
I am a sorcerer, you also ? "
" God forbid, Guy ! But remember how we are
following you through dark places, and do not
blame me if sometimes I long for the light. I
have suffered so much !" she ended, leaning her
forehead against the prisoner's shoulder.
Fongereuse spoke very gravely. " Had I known
how bitter this trial was to be to you, I would
have done all in my power to spare you! The
hand of God has brought events to a crisis, and
now I must drink my chalice without looking
behind. Forgive me for all you have suffered
through my fault, Isabelle, dear little sister, my
last sweet joy and comfort! If it cost me any-
thing to preserve my sworn silence, it was chiefly
that I felt for you, hurt by every arrow aimed
at me. Forgive me that I made your young heart
<pb>
acquainted with grief and unrest; perhaps even
with doubt."
" No!" cried Isabelle. " No, not doubt! Could
I suspect you, Guy?" She raised her head, and
looked at her brother with proud and trustful
affection. " I have trembled, and wept, and de-
spaired of your life; but suspected you, never!
Do not reproach yourself: you have done right."
" Every one has accused me."
" Because they do not know you! They have
never known you, they who dared to bear false
witness against you ! They were not worthy to
know you!"
" Well said, my lady ! " murmured Lo'ic under
his breath.
"It has been a cruel ordeal for you, Isabelle.
They tried to make you blush that you were my
sister; they tried to make my name an unbearable
burden to you."
" It is all the dearer to me, and so is my brother.
If I have any cause of thankfulness to Heaven,
it is that I am sister to-day to the prisoner, not
to the judge."
" The disfavor into which I am fallen reacts on
my few friends. The noblest of them all, your
lover, is banished merely for upholding me."
" As for him," said the young girl, with reddened
cheeks, " I prefer him, in his ruin and disgrace, to
the heir of a throne. I shall go with him into exile,
without a regret. Nor will I begrudge the tribu-
lation which was the means of revealing to me
<pb>
our Lion's noble heart. I should not have learned
how it beat only for me, Guy, save for the anguish
of these days; and I should not have found out
that a fund of delicate tenderness could lie under
armor. I am in hopes to make him forget his
Hauteclaire," she added with a little smile, "and
to give him happiness in exchange for glory, and
for whatever he has sacrificed for your sake."
" You are aspiring, Isabelle ! Hauteclaire and
glory were your only rivals. But since neither
you nor Robert complain of fate, I can only thank
Heaven for it all. Here I stand, delivered from
every bond, seeing clearly through every illusion,
every lie; alienated from my false friends, and cut
off from those who paid court to me for selfish
ends; retaining, in my misfortunes, the devotion
of heroic hearts, and my own peace of conscience.
You have one more hard day to live through,
sister dear! Will you be at the hearing?"
"Yes, Guy. I shall be near Queen Margaret.
I pray God to make your innocence clear, to assist
your witnesses, to direct your judges."
" That is well for me. Your presence will en-
courage me like that of my guardian angel, and
your prayers will help me through my last fight.
I am staking more than life, more than honor,
even: for I must fix my eternal destiny. This is
an enigma to you yet; but patience, Isabelle! A
few hours from now, and you will hold the key.
You trust your brother, do you not?"
" I trust you blindly ! " she fervently answered.
<pb>
"Believe me, then, that this is the last confes-
sion of faith I shall ever ask of you. Whatever
danger I seem to run during the trial, whatever
be the testimony of my enemies, or my own bear-
ing under it, do not fear at all. My farewell word
is: Hope! Here comes Artauld. Go, dearest.
God bless you: Our Lady hear you!"
The jailer showed himself in the crack of the
door, whispering uneasily: " Make haste, my lady:
the guards are just leaving the palace."
Isabelle laid her smooth forehead once more
against her brother's lips, and danced away, light
as a fairy. Very soon afterward, the captain of
the guards entered the cell.
" The court awaits the baron de Fougereuse."
Guy made the sign of the Cross, and followed the
officer.
The festival hall had been selected as the scene
of the solemn hearing demanded by Guy de
Fougereuse. At the request of the accused man,
the palace gates had been thrown open to the citi-
zens, and the entire aristocracy were ranged about
the enclosed space. The clergy, who, as a party,
were favorable to the prisoner, sat upon a platform
next to that of the judges. The latter, chosen
from among those equal to Fongereuse by birth
and rank, were presided over by the King in per-
son. Rene of Anjou appeared in public for the
first time since his illness. He had wished to dis-
play the royal regalia, but a great cloak edged
with ermine covered him from head to foot, to
<pb>
protect him against the winter cold, and the ducal
crown, which was too heavy for his feeble brows,
was replaced by a richly embroidered cap. The
wan, sensitive face of the old King was outlined
against the reddish hangings embossed with the
fleur-de-lys. Behind his armchair leaned Corne-
lius, flask in hand, watching him closely, and
holding himself officiously ready for emergencies.
All about was crowded the group of nobles, dressed
in black velvet, sworded, bareheaded, thoughtful.
Many of them were yesterday the foes, or at least,
the detractors of Fougereuse ; yet now every sen-
timent of envy, hate, and resentment, as well as
of friendship, fell into abeyance; for justice must
speak. The summons of Fougereuse had roused
in their knightly bosoms a sense of honor, a con-
scious love of right. It was a board of soldiers,
and it might be severe; but it would scorn to
employ quibbles and trickery, in order to extort
a confession from the prisoner. Guy had made a
wise choice, in summoning his comrades-in-arms
to try him.
No one knew how it came to pass that Walter
de Maulny, bound by ties of blood to Fougereuse,
contrived to obtain a place among thejn. Walter,
in his brazen policy, thought this move necessary
to save his credit. Should Fougereuse triumph,
his rival was undone. It would never do for
Maulny to be examined as a witness or a plaintiff.
Only a seat with the judges could exempt him
from making any statement, or taking part in any
<pb>
debate; and therefore he had most eagerly sued
for it. The King yielded to him, at a time when
he was embittered, against his former minister.
Rene's compassionate mood had passed away,
never to return. Nothing could have so wounded
his heart, nothing could have struck so direct a
blow at his royal pride, as the refusal of Fouge-
reuse to accept pardon, and this haughty appeal to
a jury of his peers. All was indeed over, between
the vassal and his sovereign: friendship was
broken, bounty cancelled, long service rendered
void. The gentleness which was withstood, had
changed into cold sternness which' no power could
disarm. Acknowledgments, repentance, entreaty,
became thenceforth of no avail, nor could ever
pacify the offended King. Guy had exhausted
the wells of mercy; and all the more inflexible
was the wrath deserved by such ingratitude.
In a dark corner of the staging, walled by the
tapestries, were the two Queens, and young Prince
Edward. He stood aside from the company, and
appeared to ignore the proceedings; Joan of Laval,
then as always, showed herself sweet and benign;
but Margaret, in her high-spirited indignation,
seemed ready to enter the lists to overthrow the
wrong. At her feet, in shadow, was Isabelle de Fou-
gereuse, fearing, hoping, praying with all her heart.
The throng were uneasy and excited. Curiosity
and dread and wonder were stamped on many
faces, and there were impatient murmurs and
whisperings, while they awaited revelations. One
<pb>
or two phrases, in particular, ran from lip to lip,
and were more than once repeated:
" Do you know, Fougereuse refused the King's
grace!" " Did they tell you that Fougereuse
asked for a trial ? " " We shall know at last, what
mystery there is about him ! "
The students, by determined elbowing of the
peaceful burgesses and the common people, had
managed to range themselves in the front rank of
the auditorium. No one sought to eject them, as
quarrels of that sort led to many complications.
They, meanwhile, wore their most professional air:
bold, aggressive, ready for defence, and eager for
attack. Save for the actual presence of the King,
various civilities would certainly have been ex-
changed between these fiery champions of Fou-
gereuse and his adversaries: lively arguments,
harangues, affronts, and probably blows.
In plain view of the populace, the titled classes
and the court held their own animated discussion.
Not one felt himself indifferent to this question of
Fougereuse's secret, which for more than a month
had agitated all minds. It was no longer a matter
of piquing a rival, but to behold acquitted or else
condemned, a knight of ancient lineage, with whose
career, honorable or dishonorable, every man had
intimate concern. Some were heard to blame him
for " making a scene," for having brought about
all this formal pomp and show. Why not have
hushed the whole thing up, so long as the King
was prepared to condone it? Others charged the
<pb>
prisoner with foolhardiness, and expressed them-
selves as dumfounded at his insolent action.
Suppose he were innocent, such conduct would lead
only to his ultimate ruin! Was he not already
too deeply compromised, unhappy being that he
was, to dare attempt a public justification?
"Among the minstrel-poets and the artists, there
was many head-shakings, and comments of "What
a pity!" for an adverse verdict seemed to them
inevitable. They were sorry for Guy, for they
could not defend him, nor, above all, save him.
If but half of the counts brought against him
were true, there would still be enough to set
fire to ten stakes, instead of to one! But the
chief sentiment which dominated the vast assem-
bly was that of eagerness to see the drama end;
the desire to possess the clue; the hunger for the
show, which is the passion of crowds.
The soldiery, drawn up in line before the plat-
forms, and clear around the enclosure, formed, with
their impassive figures, an odd contrast with the
restless multitude which filled the hall. In their
helmets, and with lances at rest, the rough, sun-
burned men stood perfectly still. Such was their
wont, under orders; and if need there were, they
would have remained until the morrow, in the
selfsame attitude, without the revolt against duty
of a single muscle. But a sharp observer might
have read dejection in their eyes. They fretted to
have been called out to see the brave baron Guy
arraigned as a criminal.
<pb>
The cathedral chime struck two. A confused
stir in the outer galleries, into which the press of
people had overflowed, indicated that the waiting
was soon to be over. The doors of the audience-
chamber opened before the captain of the guards.
After him, marched four armed men, and in their
middle, Guy de Fougereuse. As he advanced,
silence fell. All eyes were turned towards the
once fastidious gentleman, brought as a captive
from the dungeon straw. In a general thrill of
astonishment, the citizens and the court beheld the
Fougereuse of the old time, in whom nothing be-
trayed the caprices of fortune, or the change in his
own destinies. Carefully dressed in a splendid
costume of the royal colors, in a stuff shot with
gray and silver threads, and worked with ara-
besques of black, and adorned with an emerald
necklace, the richest heirloom of his family, the
young baron stepped as if going to a festival. His
clear, keen eyes had a sparkle of energy and will.
His carriage had the "grand air of Fougereuse;"
his whole person was stamped with proud and
quiet dignity. In vain would any one have
searched his face for a trace either of presumption
or of fear. Master of himself, he would not seek
to brave his judges, nor to cow them. His easv
gait belonged rather to a prince condescending to
his subjects, than to a vassal summoned before his
liege lord ; yet it was far from effrontery or affec-
tation. This intrepid serenity, which used to char-
acterize him in battle, conferred, on this occasion, a
<pb>
very especial charm. It was as though Guy de
Fougereuse had outsoared all human authority,
and had given his allegiance only to a Power not
of earth.
The singular spectacle of an. arraigned man in
gala attire, amid judges in mourning, and a som-
brely clothed assemblage, struck some present with
superstitious horror. More than one person crossed
himself with a trembling hand, while he gazed at
Guy, as if he came from the unknown world of
spirits.
"Apollo!" was the comment of a Provencal
troubadour, as the prisoner went by.
" No; Oberon rather, King of Fairyland! " re-
plied another from Lorraine, whose imagination
was seized by the poesy of the North.
When Fougereuse reached the students, they
began to wave their caps. " Courage, my lord ! "
they cried. " We are all for you! " Rene frowned.
Guy gave them a look and a sign, and suppressed
the too enthusiastic manifestation.
The accused knight arrived at the foot of the
platform where the tribunal was, respectfully un-
covered his head, and bowed low to the sovereign ;
then he slowly scanned the faces before him. His
glance crossed that of Ren6 of Anjou. It was but
instantaneous, yet long enough to let Guy de Fou-
gereuse know that he had lost his King. The
others were not pleased at this mute inspection.
At a sign from Rene", the seneschal rose, to begin
the examination. In answer to Philip de Beau-
<pb>
vau, Guy briefly declared his name and his titles.
When he was asked to swear upon the Gospels
that he would answer truly such questions as were
addressed to him, he reflected for an instant, before
laying his hand on the holy book.
"I myself convened this gathering," he said, in
a ringing voice, "and thus do I take oath in its
presence. I swear that I am innocent of treason
towards my lord and King, and innocent of all
practices forbidden by the Church. I promise on
these Gospels to reply truly; but I reserve my
right to make the whole truth known at such a
time, and in such a manner as my conscience thinks
proper. So help me God, and the ever-glorious
Virgin Mary."
The judges looked at one another, with surprise
and disapproval. They had expected some sort of
exoneration from the defendant; but here he was,
on the offensive, and deigning to expound his
intentions ! What was behind this superb assu-
rance ? Did it spring from a pure record, or from
supernatural strength, strength from hell? Fou-
gereuse's attitude had never been more enigmat-
ical.
"My lords and gentlemen, my compeers, my fel-
low soldiers I" he continued. "I have demanded
your decision of these things, so that I might clear
before all men a name which all men have slan-
dered. I confide my cause, without anxiety, to
your hands, and rely upon your impartiality. But
I also require that you shall acquaint me with the
<pb>
motive underlying my imprisonment and condem-
nation. I seek satisfaction from you, for having
been arrested and judged without a hearing! "
"You have not been judged, baron," said Rene",
straightening himself in his chair. " What is this
inopportune plaint to us? You strangely forget
both decorum and the favor which was extended
to you."
"Sire, I forget nothing; but I owe the truth to
the tribunal. . . . The King offered me my par-
don yesterday, in exchange for an avowal. My
lords, whom does one wish to reprieve, if not a
man already condemned? I knew, therefore, that
my sentence had been passed. I knew that more
than one mouth, in this company, had pronounced
it." Guy turned himself slightly towards the
courtiers, who began to murmur. There was a
moment of general uneasiness. Seeing the King's
features contract and his eyes kindle, Beauvau
hastened to intervene.
" There has been neither judgment nor sentence,
my lord of Fougereuse. To assert it is to proffer
a gratuitous insult to the royal justice. In your
situation, it would be more fitting to suppress
these audacities, which do not serve to deceive us."
"I have nothing to suppress, sir seneschal. I
have lost all I had, save honor; and that I must
defend at the cost of the rest. Meanwhile, I accept
your assurance. I will content myself with ask-
ing whether it was by regular orders that a spy
was imposed upon me in my prison."
<pb>
" A spy!" cried liens', whose good heart abhorred
the thought of cruelty or craftiness. " What does
it mean, Beauvau ? Are you not aware how re-
pugnant these measures are to me ? What bold
interloper has committed so formal a disobe-
dience?"
"I know not, sire," the seneschal quickly re-
sponded. " I never uttered a word which could
authorize such a thing. Let the captain of the
guards be brought hither, and the jailer Artauld."
Maulny dared not breathe, but he called all the
powers of evil to his aid. lie cursed Jacob, of
whose fate he was ignorant. He cursed Fouge-
reuse, whose untoward boldness upset his calcu-
lations. To what would it all lead? The captain
and Artauld were already on their feet, and
prepared, to testify. Walter leaned over towards
Cornelius, and said something in a low voice. The
physician left the King's chair, and advanced to
the front of the staging.
" The order originated with me, sire," he an-
nounced, with his usual pompous air. " Fearing
for your precious life, suspecting the accused of
promoting the disease which was wasting you,
dreading, in short, his abominable and sorcerous
spells, I decided that it was necessary to have
Fougereuse watched. I take upon myself the
whole responsibility for an act of zeal dictated by
disinterested devotion, and which was approved
by several officers of your household."
The captain of the guards protested. "I be-
.--.
<pb>
lieved it was the King's own order, for as such
it was given to me! Otherwise " —•
Artauld declared that there could be no great
harm done, talcing into consideration his choice of
a spy: a Breton idiot, who could not speak two
words of French. The brave jailer added that
he should never have had the heart to admit a
shrewder fellow, who might have brought his pris-
oner to an evil end.
" You, at least, acted like a Christian! " ex-
claimed Rene', whose eyes shot fire. " Our laws
may be severe, but I wish them to be fair and
open, even to the worst of criminals. I see what
was in your minds. You considered me as prac-
tically a corpse; you looked forward to an inter-
regnum ! Pasques-Dieu I as swears my nephew of
France, the hope of some who wished me dead
shall be crossed. I shall not so soon require you
to wear mourning for me : I mean to live long
enough to see my wishes respected."
A silence ensued after these words of the aged
monarch. Cornelius took his place, with an air of
ruffled dignity, and Walter thanked — Satan. Ow-
ing to the docility of the leech, who was only too
glad to push himself forward, Maulny succeeded
in warding off the danger; he could not now find
himself compromised, though he had been the sole
author of the obnoxious deed. Cornelius, who was
obtuse and slow, served willingly as his shield.
There remained but Jacob to consider. What had
become of Jacob, if he never had entered the cell
<pb>
at all ? Where did that indispensable witness hide
himself, he whose deposition, dictated in advance,
was going to be Walter's revenge, and Guy's cer-
tain fall? Could Fougereuse have won him over?
. . . Had Villepreux done away with him ? . . .
Was he lurking there in the crowd? ... If he
should be missing when he was wanted! . . . At
this thought, Maulny bit his lip, in a fury of
anxiety. Surely, an evil star pursued him. Could
he never escape it ? ... And yonder was Guy,
calm and smiling. What demon possessed him,
that he should be so sure of himself, in the very
hour of his ruin ? What was it, — the secret of
Fougereuse?
A debate arose between the seneschal and the
prisoner. The question of the poisoning had been
waived, but the baron insisted that it should be
brought into view, and claimed the right to have
it sifted.
" What, gentlemen ! Was I not imprisoned on
the strength of that calumny, and do you now
refuse to give me the reason for your suspicions ?
You allege that I am no longer considered guilty.
So far, so good; but I wish to know how I ever
came to be considered guilty of the odious crime.
You cannot deny me that privilege ! "
Somewhat embarrassed, the seneschal threw the
blame on circumstantial evidences, and on mali-
cious reports.
" Strange rumors touching you were in circula-
tion, Fougereuse, and your behavior bore them
<pb>
out. You affected to devote yourself to occult
researches, and it was you who poured into the
King's cup the beverage \vhich instantly caused
him to faint away. The physician declared it to
be a case of poison; I gave the order for your
arrest. Since then, it has been established that
no poison was administered. Let this suffice you.
Why do you take pains to recall so horrible a
charge, when many another one is heavy on yom-
head?"
" Because I wish to clear myself completely. I
find it unbearable to have been accused of assassi-
nation and high treason by my King, my friends,
and the whole city. I invoke his Majesty as wit-
ness. When the hunt was over, sire, you com-
missioned me to get you a flask of Naples wine.
I respectfully urged upon you that it might be
detrimental to your health, that Antonio Blandini
had positively forbidden it to you, especially in the
season when fever is prevalent. But you answered
that my duty was to obey. I bowed, and sent
young Fleurenville ahead to the appointed meet-
ing-place, telling him to find out whether any of
the huntsmen had some Italian wine with him.
At the very moment when we rode up, the little
page handed me a flagon with a chased silver stop-
per, and a cup of the same metal . . . Do you
not remember, sire ? "
" It was quite so," Rene replied. " But what is
the use ? I do not reproach you with that crime."
"Some others did and do reproach me, your
<pb>
Majesty. I took that cup and flagon from the
boy, without inquiring how he obtained them, and
under your own eyes I poured the Naples wine.
A few moments later came that swoon which
threw us all into consternation, and I was de-
spatched to the tower, by mandate of Philip de
Beauvau. I have not learned yet to whom the
cup and flagon belonged. Fleurenville alone can
tell us."
^Let Paul de Fleurenville be called," said the
King.
" There is no need of it, my lord and father," a
voice began, close to the aged sovereign's ear, " for
I know the owner of the silver vessels, and I would
ask the court to accept my testimony." And
Edward of Lancaster, Prince of Wales, stepped
forward on the platform, and stood before his
grandfather.
"Speak then, my son," said Rene.
"I declare,'' continued the heir of England,
"that both cup and flask belonged to me, and that
Fleurenville received them from me when he
brought them to Fougereuse. The Naples wine
was my refreshment after exercise. I had already
"ised a portion of it, before lending it to the King.
Unluckily for the prisoner, my horse was carrying
me homeward, when I met the page. Had I been
present at the time, I should have opposed the
arrest of the baron de Fougereuse. This is the
truth, on the faith of a prince and of a Christian." «
Rene turned toward Cornelius, who grew pale
<pb>
with spite and fear, and, in his heart, wished young
Edward a thousand miles beyond sea. " I disap-
prove your hasty action, doctor. How could you
have spoken so lightly that fatal word 'poison,'
which has engendered all the distresses we suffer
under to-day ? "
" My zeal for your Majesty's welfare. . . . Sire,
the alarm being apparently justified . . . deceptive
symptoms. . . . Science is not infallible! ... I
knew I was wrong from that same evening."
"And yet I was kept in confinement," Guy added
slowly, "although, almost from the first, my ene-
mies themselves exonerated me. Do you call that
justice ?"
" There are other counts against you, baron," re-
sumed the seneschal, "and I doubt if you can so
readily dismiss them."
" Before turning to these, sire, I beseech you that
I may force the court to declare whether I am re-
lieved from this odious accusation of poisoning! "
The judges conferred for some minutes in a low
tone, then they spontaneously rose. "We attest
that Guy de Fougereuse is entirely innocent of
having attempted the murder of his sovereign lord
by poison, and we demand to hear the remaining
indictments brought against him."
A sympathetic thrill ran through the auditors.
The students openly applauded. Maulny, disap-
pointed, clenched his fists. Yet he took heart,
reflecting that, according to his own canons, his
cousin Fougereuse had committed the worst of
<pb>
blunders: he had proved to his superiors that they
were in the wrong. Walter felt that henceforward
the jury and the defendant would be at swords'
points.
Then the regular legal process commenced.
The accusations ranged themselves under two
principal headings. One was, that Fougereuse
had bewitched the King, and harmed his health
by evil influences, in order to secure that empire
over the royal mind which Cornelius disputed with
him ; and that these spells and sorceries employed,
originated in the closet which shut without lock
or key, in his palace in town. The second was,
that Fougereuse gave asylum to a magician in
Wolfram's house, and resorted to him by night,
that he might study damnable arts, and conjure up
infernal spirits.
"I deny it absolutely," replied the baron, when
the seneschal had read the allegations. "It is an
absurd tissue of inve-ntions and popular fables,
with no basis but maudlin gossip. During six
years, I held the perfect confidence of the King,
and it was only six weeks ago that men began to
impugn my motives and my actions. I protest
strongly against these calumnies."
" So you deny it all?" asked Beauvau.
" All, without exception."
" Fougereuse, that is not tenable ! " cried the old
count d'Etriche', who sat in the front row of offi-
cials. The whole jury repeated after him: "No!
It is not tenable."
<pb>
"Will you be so good as to tell me why not?"
the prisoner exclaimed.
"Because we have evidence," answered Felix
d'Etriche. " Your commerce with hell is a matter
of public notoriety."
" ' Everybody says so :' is it not that ? " said
Guy, with his light sarcastic smile. "I am famil-
iar with the argument, for I have heard it many a
time on frivolous or ignorant lips. But I hardly
expected to meet it in a hall of justice! "
"You have never refuted the general opinion,
before to-day. What was your object in strength-
ening it by your silence ? "
"Since I have lived the life of courts, gentle-
men, experience has taught me this: foolish is he
who would undertake to chain up a mountain tor-
rent, and yet more foolish he who would stop the
flood of detraction and malice which flows from
idle tongues! I scorned to notice the chatter, or
to contradict it, so long as the King honored me
with his favor. Nothing else mattered much! But
to-day, my illustrious master doubts me ; and there-
fore have I invited a solemn judgment, that to all
these falsehoods I might give the lie."
" The tribunal has the right to exact proofs of
your bold statements."
"' What you freely deny, I may as freely affirm,'"
Fougereuse rejoined, quoting an old philosophic
axiom. " I await your proofs before producing
mine."
"You passed the night of November fifteenth
<pb>
in the haunted house in Pouille wood. Do you
admit it?"
" I will say neither ' Yea' nor ' Nay.' Have you
witnesses to the fact?"
" Call Jacob Piteux," ordered the seneschal,
raising his voice. The bailiffs called. Silence
answered. Maulny felt the cold sweat stand 'on
his brow.
"What has become of Piteux aforesaid?" in-
quired Philip de Beauvau, irritably.
" Disappeared!" cried some one in the crowd.
At the seneschal's request, the man who had
spoken came forward, making an awkward salute.
" Who are you? "
" Martin Bodin, messire, proprietor of the Red
Rose, the best inn in Anjou."
"Are you acquainted with this Jacob Piteux?"
" He is my cousin."
" How do you know he has disappeared? What
was the manner of his disappearance ? "
"How do I know it? Because the day before
yesterday he came to me in the evening, and
asked for supper and lodging. And the manner
of it? It was in the manner of robbers, to wit:
Jacob decamped by night with a good fur cloak
that I had from my uncle Jasper, and with a fat
purse belonging to a travelling gentleman. And
you need never expect master Piteux to return to
you!"
The seneschal made a negative gesture; Maulny
bit his lip for anger. Jacob had tricked him, and
<pb>
had escaped at the critical moment, with his gold
and his secrets! The flight of his spy threw Wal-
ter into a great perplexity, for in Piteux he lost
his certain aid to success. Nevertheless, he re-
solved to strive desperately to win this last fight
with Fougereuse, and he put on a bold face.
Philip de Beauvau detained the innkeeper, and
questioned him thoroughly, concerning the night
of the fifteenth of November at the Red Rose.
Bodin related in detail all that had taken place,
speaking slowly, recollecting himself now and
then, and endeavoring to reassure the court as to
the trend of the adventure. According to him,
it was a mere spurt of fun, following a drinking-
bout. Vincent Govier made a jovial fellow's brag;
Lo'ic was playing a fantastic joke, as boys are wont
to do. The very next day, were not both of them
present at the tourney, full of health and spirits?
What could be brought against the proprietor of
the tavern, in regard to their going to the Devil's
House ? He had done everything in his power to
hold the equerry back, and he had carefully nursed
the page. Since that time, he had had no dealings
with them: he had no desire to compromise him-
self by getting entangled with current gossip.
The Red Rose was a well-kept, well-patronized,
decent, Christian place; and Bodin was a good son
of holy Church, and a faithful subject of King
Rene". All the harm came from Jacob, who would
never stop telling stories of the supernatural, to
amuse the guests and bring the inn into disrepute.
<pb>
No one had ever noticed anything strange or sus-
picious about the east side of the turret, up to the
last November. " And notwithstanding the fact
that you see that from the windows ! " Martin con-
cluded, with a sigh.
" Is this all you know ? " asked the seneschal.
" All, my lord."
" The equerry and little Kernis could tell us
more," remarked Felix d'Etriche. " Neither of
them fled away from the lodge without some good
reason."
" You see, gentlemen," said Walter de Maulny,
"that the absence of the witnesses is an intentional
part of the defence! It is easy for Fougereuse to
defy us to establish the crime, when our means of
doing so are withdrawn."
Guy smiled, not without disdain. Turning
towards the great assemblage, he cried:
" Vincent Govier ! "
" Present, my lord ! " replied a burly voice.
" Come. You are needed."
Govier obeyed. No one had encountered him
since the imprisonment of his master, and the sight
produced something of a sensation among the peo-
ple. A hundred grotesque rumors had been cir-
culated about him. They had had him carried off
by demons, drowned in the Maine, shut up in the
magic closet, changed into a werewolf: yet here
was master Vincent in his own flesh and blood, per-
fectly stolid, and in the correct military attitude.
" Whence are you?" King Ren<j asked.
<pb>
The veteran saluted, and answered: " From the
palace of the baron de Fougereuse."
" Why have you lain hidden recently ? "
" I was under orders."
" Whose orders ? "
" My lord of Villepreux's."
" Robert wished to save my servants from the
rack," Fougereuse interpolated. " I know that
his Majesty held no threat over them, but they
were in some danger, so long as we feared the
death of the King."
" What zeal! " commented Ren6 of Anjou, cast-
ing a cold glance at Cornelius and at Walter.
" Reply without fear, Vincent. What was your
motive in going to Wolfram's house ? "
" To .cut short the talk of my lord Walter de
Maulny, in regard to my master."
"I should like to remind the court," interrupted
Walter, " that it is the policy of the supporters of
Fougereuse to mix my name with all their fictions
and imaginings."
" Fictions ! " echoed Vincent hotly. " Is it any
fiction, messire Walter, to maintain that you never
loved the Fougereuse family, and that you cher-
ished always a particular grudge towards my young
lord? Will you deny having told me that your
cousin had given his estates in fief to the Devil,
and that his tenant would yet lure him to the scaf-
fold? And imaginings! " growled the old soldier,
with rising wrath: " who ever knew Vincent Govier
to imagine anything?"
<pb>
" Well! that is by no fault of yours, my trusty
one ! " Guy said gently, while the nobles on the
judicial bench exchanged an involuntary smile.
" What did you find at the haunted house ? "
continued the seneschal.
The equerry turned towards his master.
" Answer, friend : for this is the proper time,"
the prisoner assented.
" I will do as you wish, my lord. . . . The first
thing that I found, sir seneschal, was Val."
" Val ? " repeated the seneschal.
" The baron's horse," Govier explained. " The
poor dear beast was standing in a hut of branches,
and whinnied joyfully when he saw me. I feared
some misadventure had befallen my master; and
I threw myself against the turret door, beating it
with my fist, and shouting with all my might."
" No one replied, no one opened to you ? "
" Yes, indeed yes ! A voice came through the
window: ' Vincent Govier ! what are you doing
here at this hour ?' I said: ' I am looking for
my master, the baron de Fougereuse, and I mean
to have him, alive or dead !' After a few minutes
the door was unlocked, and I nearly fell• back-
wards, I was so amazed! "
"What did you see?" Several of the judges
had spoken together.
" My young lord himself, with a lantern in his
hand."
A shiver ran through the audience, at this un-
expected revelation. The judges looked at one
<pb>
another. Guy remained calm, and gave no sigh.
" Go on," he commanded his equerry.
" Then," resumed the witness, " the baron ac-
costed me. ' Govier,' said he, ' you are not at
your post. Return at once to Angers, and get my
household ready for a tourney which the King in-
tends shall take place to-morrow. And keep silence
until you receive fresh orders!' Well, I obeyed,
item by item. I took the road to Angers, and ar-
rived home after two o'clock. That is why they
did not see me again at the Red Rose. At dawn,
my young lord appeared there among his retainers;
he examined my preparations, and he ended with :
' Vincent, you have done well!' "
" And then ? " prompted Beauvau, as Vincent
came to a pause.
" That is all, sir seneschal."
" What explanation of the affair did the baron
offer?"
"Why, none!" exclaimed Vincent, surprised.
" He never spoke of it at all."
"And you never sought to find an explanation? "
" My master had warned me: ' Keep silence,
until "you receive fresh orders.' I waited for
those orders."
" Did you report aught of this to any one ? "
" Not even to my confessor. I repeat, I had in-
structions to hold my tongue."
"Yet it is impossible that you did not think
about it! " cried Rene".
" I had no instructions to think about it."
<pb>
" You are playing the machine, soldier," the sene-
schal resumed, " but you cannot deceive us. What
do you know about the little closed room in Fou-
gereuse's house here in town?"
" That it was built by the first Lord Amaury,
God rest his soul! after he became gouty and
deaf; for he needed a place like that, where he
could safely confess to his chaplain."
" Does it serve the same purpose with Baron
Guy?"
" I do not know. My lord does not tell us any-
thing about his private devotions."
" Have you sometimes seen your master go into
it?"
"No, messire."
"Did you ever enter it yourself?"
"Never."
"What does the baron conceal in it?"
" Sir seneschal," broke forth the equerry, who
could hardly keep his patience, " for two hundred
years the Goviers have lived and died in the ser-
vice of the family of Fougereuse, not in the qual-
ity of spies, but in that of followers-at-arms !"
The students cheered this answer on the part of
the old soldier. The court deemed it useless to
interrogate him further. Vincent had said all that
he could say; they could have cut him into inch
pieces, sooner than extract a word more from him.
"Baron Guy de Fougereuse," called Philip de
Beau van, " to what do you object in the deposition
of Vincent Govier?"
<pb>
" I object to nothing."
" Do you agree that it is true ? "
" It is very accurate. Vincent can neither lie
nor invent."
" Do you now acknowledge your presence at the
haunted house, on the night of November fif-
teenth?"
"I acknowledge it."
" You remember having commanded your
equerry to keep your secret?"
" I do."
" What was your reason for being there at that
hour, and why did you constrain Vincent Govier
to silence ? "
" I will answer in due time. Summon the other
witnesses."
The court deliberated. The imperiousness of
the prisoner displeased them, and his refusal to ex-
plain was thought to be incriminating. The sene-
schal beckoned to the bailiffs, and whispered a name.
" The young count de Kernis!" cried four
nasal voices in chorus.
There was a commotion in the crowd, as a Bre-
ton peasant, with loose curls and tanned cheeks,
turning the brim of a huge hat round and round in
his hands, emerged, bowed to the tribunal, and
stood waiting to be questioned.
"What is this? " asked the seneschal, scrutiniz-
ing the strange creature, whose bright eyes and
roguish smile belied his rustic appearance. " I
summoned Kernis."
<pb>
"And this," murmured Walter, "is some fa-
miliar demon, which the Evil One has placed at
Fougereuse's disposal."
The witness poised proudly his supple figure,
and tossing his long locks, announced:
" I am the last descendant of Nomenoe, King
of Brittany. My name is Louis Artus III., Count
de Kernis." »
" Lo'ic! " exclaimed several of the lords. " Im-
possible ! Such a transformation is beyond human
power! "
" There is no sorcery at work, messires. I beg
his Majesty's pardon for presenting myself before
him with my hair and my complexion dyed, and
in shepherd's clothes. I put on this disguise that
I might obtain entrance into my master's dungeon."
"What!" exclaimed Rene. "The newly ar-
rived cousin who spoke no French, the idiot
Alanik!"
" That is it," said Lo'ic modestly. " I fooled
Artauld."
"And you do not hesitate to avow it? " Beauvau
went on, in a severe tone. " Wretched boy! do
you see to what you expose yourself by this com-
plicity in the intrigues of Fougereuse ? "
" To a share in his fate, I suppose ! Far from
dreading that, I desire it. Sir seneschal, treat me
no more as a child whom one can frighten. I am
no longer a page. I have been appointed equerry."
At this declaration, made with intense pride,
the judges had to smile again. Walter de Maulny
<pb>
made the new equerry an ironic salute, and whis-
pered teasingly: " A thousand congratulations on
your brilliant good fortune ! "
" And what do you call the intrigues of Fouge-
reuse ? " Lo'ic boldly resumed. " If I altered my
own appearance, so that I might join him in his
cell, are you going to blame him for it ? I did it
of my own accord, without any person's advice.
My master had nothing to do with it, and I am the
only one responsible."
" With what design, messire de Kernis, did you
so disobey the royal orders ? Wherefore this trick,
unworthy of a gentleman? Why such haste to
communicate with a prisoner who was then sus-
pected of an attempt to poison ?''
"Why? Because I wished to .serve, in his ad-
versity, my betrayed and forsaken lord. Because
I rather thought it was my duty ! "
" Can you swear that your service embraced no
secret message; no plan of escape, nor conspiracy
of any sort?"
" I besought the baron to fly, and to leave me as
hostage in his stead. An escape was possible. It
all depended upon him, and he refused."
All eyes were turned on Guy. King Rene
asked : " Fougereuse, is this true ? "
" Yes, sire : it is true. But there is nothing to
wonder at, and no reason why merit should be im-
puted to me. I had no plot against the State to
defeat. The whole matter was but an enthusiastic
dream on the part of a child who is blindly devoted
<pb>
to me, who has sworn to die for me or with me,
and who was determined to sacrifice his life. If
this be a fault, it is one rare enough to deserve
indulgence. I do not believe that your Majesty
will permit it to be construed as high treason."
" The King is moved, you see ! " Maulny breathed
into the ear of the viscount William de la Bohalle,
who sat next him. " Guy knows how to touch a
responsive chord. On my soul, what consummate
skill he has! If we do not control things better,
this Devil's piper will play upon us all. Say a
word to change the present theme, will you?"
" Answer, then, my good novice equerry! " ex-
claimed the viscount. " Did you not deem your
master guilty, since you endeavored to arrange
his escape ? "
" I was convinced that my master was above re-
proach, but I could not forget the low, fierce hates
and jealousies of which he was the object. Com-
mon talk would have it that the King was dying.
Messire de Maulny was already crying victory."
"Impudent little liar!" cried Walter harshly,
wincing under the dart Lo'ic had aimed at him.
" Dare you utter my name ? What reliance will
this tribunal place upon the word of a vagabond
stranger, brought by Fougereuse from Lord-knows-
where, associated with his own detestable deeds,
caught in the act of murdering a faithful attendant
of the King, and heard to utter outrageous criti-
cisms on our venerated King himself? A hun-
dred times have I refrained from punishing your
<pb>
arrogance, but now you force my hand, and I
demand "—
" Demand whatsoever you please, Walter de
Maulny!" Loi'c sang out, eying his adversary
with scornful bravado. "Your threats cannot
make me alter a word of my testimony. What is
this you remark concerning vagabonds, in your
contempt for me ? A scion of the old royal house
of Brittany, I can never ask of you, 'Where are
titles so ancient as mine?' but, 'Where are my
equals by birth?' I see before me but one: Rene",
our sovereign lord! "
The chivalry of Anjou was visibly disturbed:
those nobles on the platform as well as those in
the hall. Protests and murmurs arose against
Lo'io's boldness. He, standing motionless, his
head thrown back, his face white with emotion,
his nostrils trembling like those of the war-horse
who hears the bugles, was elated with his first
battle for the honor of Fougereuse. The indomi-
table energy of his country, its iron determination,
had full swing now in the descendant of Nomenoe.
He was resolved to dare everything, and push on
to the end, overturning all obstacles, never paus-
ing, never flinching, never looking back, not even
for love of his master. And God would do the
rest!
"Now then, gentlemen, silence!" The com-
mand, in the shrill voice of the King, surmounted
the din, and hushed it. " Why such astonishment,
and such a clamor? The blazons of my fair
<pb>
province need not blush, though they must own
that they are not derived from the kings Hoel,
Gradlon, and Nomenoe. For nay own part, I con-
sider that this child natters me, in calling me his
equal. Come hither, my dispossessed prince, and
confer with me. ' Good blood cannot lie? Your
ancestors bequeathed you, instead of a throne, a
wonderful courage, if not much policy. I wish to
question you in person; for it would be a pity that
my seneschal should set traps for one like you !"
Lo'ic approached the dais, and faced the King,
looking at him alone, and seeming to ignore or
disdain the others.
" Plague take the monkey!" was Walter's
thought. " With his blunders and silly speeches,
he has managed to gain the good graces of our
estimable liege, who is smitten with heroism of
the moral sert. What hallucination leads him
wantonly to ruin his career, by so clinging to a
disgraced peer? My one spy, hired on liberal
terms, has to play me false, while Guy has a free
gift of hostages, rescuers, champions, frantic at-
tachments, and reckless companionships in misfor-
tune. And they do not impute it to sorcery! . . .
What else, first and last, is the luck of Fouge-
reuse?"
Having secured a witness to his liking, Rene of
Anjou took his time in examining Lo'ic de Kernis,
not indeed on the subjects of political plots, which,
to him, were of small concern, but in regard to
Guy's own habits, the mystery thrown around
<pb>
them, the occupations which he concealed from
all men, even from Rene himself, and the main-
spring of the exclusions and the distrust which
had wounded his old heart to the quick. The
King would gladly have exculpated Fougereuse
from every other offence, but he could not forgive
his favorite for having secrets which he was not
invited to share.
The boy's responses were clear and prompt, and
without a shade of hesitation. He contradicted
fearlessly whatever he thought was wrong; made
sport, with his fiery, student-like humor, of the
legendary tittle-tattle dear to credulous spirits;
called upon a member of the jury, at need, to cor-
roborate him; and, in general, conceded nothing
to public opinion, but let fall one positive state-
ment after another, without qualification or change.
The truth was given with utter candor, and Walter
de Maulny followed it with keen attention. Lo'ic
had just been reproducing, with appallingly ac-
curate mimicry, the language, accent, gesture, the
whole little dramatic prologue, of that evening of
November fifteenth. The hearers hung upon his
lips, entranced by so picturesque and striking a
narration. As their interest grew, their curiosity
and sarcasm came into play; nor were these exer-
cised now at the expense of the prisoner. Walter
felt that he was becoming a target for sinister
smiles and stolen glances, and for the biting com-
ment which buzzed on all sides. To this volley
of little steel arrows he presented his cold natural
<pb>
pride as his best shield, but his apprehensions were
gaining upon him: for he could not prevent Lo'ic
from making him ridiculous. There was no pos-
sible point which could be raised in opposition
to a scrupulously exact, indeed, a far too exact,
deposition. The page never failed to show forth
Maulny's real sentiments with telling emphasis,
though Maulny flattered himself that these had
been impossible to divine. The young scrapegrace
must have been well tutored by his master: it was
not his wont to be so circumspect! One must lie
in wait for the first misstep of this merciless good
memory.
"Did you succeed in looking into the turret
chamber from the tree ? " Rene inquired.
" I did, sire."
" Was Fougereuse there ? "
" He was."
"Alone?"
" With one companion." Excitement stirred
again among the crowd.
"Are you perfectly sure of this?"
" Yes."
" Can you tell us who the man was ? "
" I do not know who he may be; I did not see
his face."
" Describe him."
" He was very tall. He wore a scarlet robe,
like that of the officers of the ducal palace. He
had a skull-cap of the same color."
"What were they doing, he and the baron?"
<pb>
" The unknown was bending towards the hearth,
stirring the fire. My master was studying some
manuscripts by the light of the lamp."
"Had Fougereuse the custom of visiting this
house? "
" It was the first time I had ever seen him there."
"Was the unknown a transient guest, or an
habitual resident of the turret chamber?"
" I do not know. I never heard any one speak
of him."
" What explanation did your master offer, when
you told him of jour discovery? "
" I only told him of it in his dungeon. He said
that my eyes had not deceived me. He said also
that I was not to suppress any part of the truth,
when I came to the witness-stand."
"Baron Guy," cried the King, "do you hear
this child?"
"Yes, sire. Every word is correct."
" What companion had you that night ? I wish
to know."
" Your Majesty has given orders to have Wolf-
ram's house searched. In a few minutes, the per-
son desired will stand before the court."
"Do you refuse to name him?"
"I do refuse: absolutely."
"Wretch! You are risking your life."
" I am bound by a promise, and I mean to keep
my word."
" This is but a pretext!" the judges objected.
"Name your accomplice."
<pb>
"What do you call an accomplice? Am I so
notorious for sorcery that any man seen in my
company must pass for an infernal agent? Since
when have I forfeited my right to converse with
Christian folk?"
"You cannot thus impose upon us. Acknowl-
edge that you were entertaining Satan! " . . .
" You conceal a magician there ! " . . . " You are
conjuring up spirits! " . . . " You conspire with
traitors against our King! "
" Enough, gentlemen ! " said the prisoner, in
steady tones. "You were summoned hither to
judge me, not to abuse me."
The haughty reminder raised a storm of indig-
nation. But in the face of the obstinate silence
of Fougereuse, there was nothing to do but resume
the examination of Lo'ic.
"What did you think, my pretty page, when
you surprised your master in a colloquy with
Satan?" ironically continued Felix d'Etriche.
" I did not think, certainly, that there was like-
lihood of Satan's being mixed up in my master's
affairs! I said to myself: ' My lord is housing
somebody in trouble.' And you smile at that?
Why, it is not the first time he has done such a
thing! He had a leper once at Fougereuse; he
used to dress his wounds in secret."
" Come, come !" was the cry all along the plat-
form; "will you try to make us believe that you
hold the baron to be a saint ? "
" Yes ! That is just what he is I" answered the
<pb>
boy, quite beside himself at the sight of this con-
temptuous scepticism. "I, never held him to
be anything else! You will not find one of his
own household who does not agree with me !
Listen: I will tell you the real secrets of Fouge-
reuse!"
And to the multitude before him, by this time
worked up into a passion of interest and curiosity,
Lo'ic de Kernis spoke. Simply as a child, fear-
lessly as a gallant gentleman, he began to outline
broadly the inner life of Guy de Fougereuse: that
life shut away from men, which could not go un-
detected by one in daily contact with it. Piety
and charity, most fervent, most generous, had
filled up the leisure hours of the King's elegant
favorite. A holy soul dwelt beneath the smooth
and sparkling carriage of the courtier. How often
had Lo'ic surprised him at prayer, during the hours
set apart for sleep! How often had he been the
prudent go-between, when good offices and alms-
giving were in question! He set forth the great
love the baron had for the poor: how he sacrificed
to them his time, his physical strength, his for-
tune ; how he dedicated to them, at the hospice of
Saint John, his early morning hours, day after day;
how he shrank from no service he could render
them, nor from any hardship involved. Kneeling
before these unfortunates, he would wash their feet
with as much reverence as if they were the Lord
Christ Himself! . . . And what could be said of
his conduct towards his own vassals ? During the
<pb>
last epidemic of typhoid, did not Fougereuse travel
into the country to his own estates, where the fever
raged, and stay there till it was allayed? Was he
not the only physician, the only comforter his peo-
ple had, in that terrible hour? Did he not heal
the sick, and bury the dead, until he was himself
stricken down? And if he did not die of it all,
that was Our Lady's miracle! "Believe me, my
lords and gentlemen! " cried Lo'ic, in ardent con-
clusion, "believe an orphan who has slept under
Baron Guy's roof, eaten his bread, tried his pa-
tience ! These are the only secret circumstances,
the mysteries, of his life: and this is he whom you
treat as a reprobate. Saints of Brittany! who,
then, are God's elect?"
The acclamations of the crowd greeted this
apostrophe. Over all rang the shouts of the vas-
sals of Fougereuse:
" Give us back our master! We offer hostages.
Takes our lives, but deliver Baron Guy !"
" Liberty, liberty ! " chorused the students, wav-
ing their hands.
" This is very much like sedition," said the sen-
eschal, rising to his feet. "Guards, remove the
ringleaders."
"No, Philip," the King interposed, with anima-
tion. " It is your severity which alienates my sub-
jects from me. Their affection may express itself
in questionable ways, but it is warm and true; I
am unwilling to have it taken from me. . . . An-
swer, baron de Fougereuse. Is it a work of mercy
<pb>
which you have been so carefully concealing at the
haunted house ? "
"No, sire."
Again the group of lords exchanged a significant
look. They had remained impassive and incredu-
lous while Loic presented his frank plea. With
these worldly men, far more inclined to accredit
evil than to spend their enthusiasm upon virtue,
the venomous hints of Maulny outvalued the fond
revelations of the young page. For a long time,
Fougereuse had been a suspected character. It
cost too much to acquiesce at once in his innocence,
and even good King Rene" sadly shook his head.
" I affirm," Lo'ic continued, " nay, I swear to you,
that my master has been cruelly belied. I have
proofs of it."
" Eh ? Let us have them ! " the King replied
impatiently. " We are not here to hearken to
panegyrics."
" Then let me draw up an arraignment, sire. . . .
There lives one who holds Baron Guy in immortal
hatred. He glides along in the dark, like a thief,
to keep track of his operations; he sends spies to
dog his footsteps ; he does not blush to defame, by
means of the most brazen inventions, the honor of
a family which nurtured him. I, even I, have seen
this traitor waiting, at the corner of a disreputable
street, for the miserable informer whom he hires,
and I have heard them planning their infamous
revenges. To pierce an adversary to the heart
with a poniard, — that is a vulgar business. But.
<pb>
to wound him in his reputation, by a calumny, with-
out running any risks, without compromising one's
self ; to see him fall into disgrace, droop under con-
demnation, and die a shameful death on the scaf-
fold or at the stake; — that is a stroke of genius!
And that is what the two accomplices engaged to
do. They made a division of labor: one was to
destroy the standing of the favorite, at court, by in-
nuendoes cleverly strewn about; the other was to
excite the popular imagination with gross rumors.
On that particular evening their chief industry had
been to represent the baron as a vampire who fed
by night on the bodies of the dead. The spy under-
took to get him accused, in time, of all the crimes
of Giles de Retz, before a single voice should be
raised in protest, so infinitely befooled can people
be ! Both of them laughed aloud at the docility of
their dupes, as at so many long-eared asses. But
they began to quarrel as soon as ever the underling
claimed his salary. The gentleman drew his dag-
ger, and said in a fury: ' Villain ! I will pay you
with this.' Then the poor devil shook with fear,
and started off, shouting ' Help !' I ran up, and
received the slender blade full in my arm, for it had
been thrown like a javelin, in the Italian fashion.
Of course it was not meant for me, but I kept it,
without scruple, as my share of the booty. I have
it with me, sire. Behold it! "
" You lie ! " roared Walter de Maulny. " You
stole it from me."
" Take your own property, my lord," added Ker-
<pb>
nis, with a withering smile. " I did not mention
your name, but your conscience has a voice louder
than mine."
" I proclaim, sire," cried Maulny, " that a bolder
imposture never saw the light of day. This page
is Fougereuse's imp of wickedness, and would sell
his chance of salvation to benefit his master. False-
hood is his element. How can we endure the pres-
ence of such an impudent trickster ? Away with
you, son of a sorceress ! "
"You forget yourself, Maulny," said the King
dryly. "I alone have the right to order any one
hence. If you be accused unfairly, vindicate your-
self. You will be heard, according to the law of
equity, which it is our duty to maintain."
"I shall not stoop to a vindication," Walter re-
plied wrathfully; " and I am astounded that any
should be expected of me. My honor is above
suspicion ! "
"Ah ! since when ?" cried several sarcastic voices
from the group of University youths. The smiles
and whispers which this sally evoked so exasper-
ated their victim that he lost control of himself.
He began to abuse Lo'ic, to brave his equals beside
him, to threaten the students; he even offered to
put out any pair of eyes which ventured to look
insolently at him. Cornelius, who endeavored to
quiet him, was brutally repulsed, and dubbed a
poisoner.
" He is crazy, sire ; crazy clear through! " ex-
claimed the doctor in consternation.
<pb>
" Walter, Walter!" arose to right and left of
Maulny. . . . " It is a delirium, gentlemen." . . .
"It is an attack of insanity I" ... " It is more
like a possession.". . . "He has been bewitched!"
" Sire,"the seneschal broke in, "whether Maulny
be guilty or only demented, we desire that he shall
no longer sit as one of us."
" Maulny, leave the platform," Rene commanded
sharply. " You are no longer a judge, but are
yourself upon trial."
"Who dares accuse me, who dares?" Walter
gathered himself together, and faced the King, as
Lucifer, in his defeat, might turn under the heel
of Michael the Archangel. " I defy every one of
you!"
"It is I who accuse you, Walter de Maulny,"
Lo'ic said: " I accuse you, in the presence of God
and of your earthly sovereign, of having, through
your calumnies, attempted to destroy the life and
the good name of the baron Guy de Fougereuse.
Do not deny it; you have betrayed yourself."
" Vaiiet! Ape of a Breton ! You lie."
" You know I do not lie, my lord of Maulny ! "
" The honor of Fougereuse was as dear to me
as my own. How then, could I have contrived the
infamous campaign which this infernal young
scoundrel assigns me ? "
"You had always a jealous grudge against your
cousin Guy; you have hated him beyond redemp-
tion, since he prevented you from paying suit to the
lady Isabelle. You have never ceased pursuing
<pb>
him with your rancorous perfidy. Have we neither
ears nor eyes, we of the household of Fougereuse,
here in Angers ? Is not there one among us whom
you have not tried to corrupt, or tempted to talk !
They will witness to it. And what baseness did
you not employ in my own case, when you knew I
had fallen under my master's displeasure ? What
did you not say to me, to estrange me from him,
and extort some confession from me, to his disad-
vantage ?"
" You and your master have sworn to ruin me,
because you feared my knowledge of your seditious
intrigues, and diabolic customs, and heathenish
crimes. You have both been seen performing your
wicked incantations ; you have been heard "—
" Oh, go on! I know the whole rigmarole. Your
worthy associate composed it for you, piece by
piece, at the corner of Chaperonnifire Street, on the
evening when I had the honor and happiness of
overhearing your conversation."
" Whelp! Jacob Piteux never used such lan-
guage. It looks well for you to blame him, when
your master has treacherously caused him to dis-
appear, in order to escape being condemned by his
testimony ! I require" —
"You are compromising yourself, my noble
lord. It is not Piteux whom I denounce."
" A truce to your fits of temper, Maulny! " ex-
claimed Rene, as he saw the enraged knight take
a step forward, with bloodshot eyes. " You admit,
then, that you are acquainted with this Piteux?"
<pb>
"Yes, sire," Walter answered, desperately hold-
ing out against hostile circumstance; "yes, sire: I
am acquainted with him, and I would give my
right arm to have him here, as his mere presence
would drive this b.irefaced liar underground.
But Jacob has vanished. His silence was neces-
sary to Fougereuse. Dead men tell no tales."
For some moments preceding, the attention of
the public had been drawn from the hearing, and
had concentrated itself on a certain part of the
hall, where some disturbance had arisen. Just
as Walter, in his hardihood and fancied security,
deplored the absence of the important witness, a
sonorous voice rang from the crowd: "You have
your wish, messire de Maulny: here is Jacob
Piteux!"
Every head turned immediately towards a side
door, which swung to. There Villepreux's manly
countenance towered over the crowd; and a little
less tall than he, were two bronzed, dark-eyed
figures, with glittering white teeth: a couple of
Penitent Thieves in silhouette against the light.
" Jacob! " was the cry. " But where is Jacob? "
"Make way !" commanded Robert, stretching
his hand over the heads-nearest to him. And as
if by magic, a path opened through the surging
multitude. One could see in quick advance,
emerging from the confused mass below, the three
casques of Saracen steel, flashing as they came.
Once they had reached the enclosure, there ap-
peared, between the soldiers, a little, shrunken,
,
<pb>
shaking, pitiable being, who had been indistin-
guishable until now. At a sign from their chief,
the Thieves released their unhappy captive; and
Villepreux, picking him up by the sleeve, shoved
him to the edge of the tribunal, saying: " Jacob
Piteux, my lords! "
The judges bent forward curiously, to examine
the witness so eagerly reclaimed. Looking rather
like a trapped fox than like a human creature
called in to further the ends of justice, Jacob be-
meaned himself more and more, wriggling his
spine, and casting sullen, furtive glances from
side to side. Maulny stood speechless before his
inopportunely recovered spy, whose arrival cut
the ground from beneath his closing statement.
"Your Majesty, and you, my lords," Ville-
preux began, "accept my testimony in regard to
this man. Three days ago, my soldiers caught
him in the very act of espionage, outside a lower
door of the palace of Fougereuse. For that mat-
ter, he did not deny his honorable calling, but
maintained that he followed it for the benefit of
another, a fine gentleman, whom he accused of
paying him very irregularly. As he said he had
just been hurt by the hoofs of one of my horses,
I had him charitably cared for, and kept out
of sight until further orders. He was willing
enough, until I let him know that he would be
wanted at this trial in the quality of witness.
Then terror seized him, and he implored me to let
him go. I refused; but he dispensed with a per-
<pb>
mission, and succeeded in escaping from the house.
My Thieves, however, are not dismayed at a little
thing like that. They scented the runaway, over-
took him in the open country, some miles out,
and brought him home. Here he is."
" Very good, Villepreux," Rene said with some
stiffness; for the sight of the captain of the Peni-
tent Thieves brought back to him the memory
of a painful scene. "Very good: the tribunal
thanks you. . . . Approach, my man, and speak
without any misgiving. Under the shield of
your King, you have nothing to fear. If you are
not exempt from blame in this affair, confess your
wrong-doing frankly, and receive your certain par-
don. But remember that we must have the truth,
and the whole truth. Do you understand? "
"I understand, my dread sovereign lord, and
I swear to reply as honestly as at the Last Judg-
ment," responded Jacob, bowing down to the
ground. " I throw myself entirely upon the clem-
ency and the gracious protection of your Majesty,
which were never invoked in vain."
" I require no flattery from you. What is your
name?"
" Jacob Piteux. My family is connected with
the middle class, and my relative Bodin, who was
formerly under arms for the King, will go bail for
me."
"Will I, monster?" shouted the innkeeper,
leaning forward over the railing of the enclosure.
"You wait until I go bail for you!" The inter-
<pb>
riiption hardly reached the tribunal, but Jacob
heard it, and winced.
"I am but a poor wretch, sire, slighted by
every one, and trodden under foot, like a worm, by
my own kith and kin. Those bound to me in
friendship have cast me off, because they are
ashamed of my misery. Great and small scoff at
me and maltreat me; the rich drive me away, and
the poor are jealous of me. What would become
of me, saving your lordships' presence, if I did
not live by the wits which Heaven bestowed on
me? It is no discredit to have tact and clever-
ness !"
"You are too conversational. Let us come to
the point. What has been your office between
my lord of Maulny and Guy de Fougereuse ?"
"This, in truth, most noble prince. I was at
the Red Rose one evening, when Vincent Govier
and the gentle count de Kernis took the notion to
visit the Devil's House. It did not suit messire
de Maulny to follow them, but he sent me on the
trail. In fact, I found the young baron of Fouge-
reuse coming out of Wolf's turret."
"We know he passed the night there. What
then ? "
"Then I informed messire Walter. He seemed
much pleased at the news, and desired to learn
more. So, to oblige him, I agreed to watch the
baron's proceedings."
" Did Maulny pay you for these services ?"
"Sire, my fortune has never been so consider-
<pb>
able that it could secure me the luxury of work-
ing for nothing. Messire Walter promised me a
good deal; but as for having paid me, that is
another story! "
"Knave, equivocator !" cried Maulny. "Vile
serpent! Do you attempt to assert" —
"Silence is enjoined upon you, Walter," de-
clared Rene, in a tone which he rarely employed,
but which no man was inclined to disobey.
"Continue, Jacob. Omit nothing."
" Your Majesty can see that it is not always well
to resist the will of the lords of the land. They
have two irresistible arguments: menaces and
money. I was faithful to my commission; and
every evening I waited for the baron as he came
forth from his town-house, and followed him like
his shadow."
"Whither did he go?"
" Oh! to a hundred different places. He never
took me twice to the same spot. Sometimes to
church, sometimes to a den of cutthroats, some-
times " —
"I advise you to boast of your acuteness!"
interrupted Lo'ic. " Here you have been spying
the page, for the last month, instead of the master.
It is I who made you lose your breath, racing
after me, wherever I cared to lead you!"
" Oh!" said Jacob, in a mournful surprise.
"Surely you are joking, my sweet sir?"
" I am not your sweet sir, and I want no fa-
miliarities. Nor am I joking. You followed my
<pb>
lord of Fougereuse just once; and that was on the
first day of your professional engagement. He
went to the Cathedral. Afterward, I cut short
your opportunities of that sort, by occupying your
nightly leisure, myself. Great George, comrade!
but you and I have had some famous walks to-
gether. Do you remember a certain attack that
sent you scampering like a hare down to the bank
of the river, and almost into the bed of it, you
were so scared ? Do you remember certain confi-
dential interviews at the cross-roads, with some
individuals who must have been unhooked from
the gallows-tree, if one might judge by their ap-
pearance? And lastly, you do remember, do you
not? certain plans and programmes laid out by
you and your worthy employer, whereby you aimed
at nothing less than the burning at the stake of
Guy de Fougereuse ? Ah, ha! my prudent Jacob!
I have profited by your teaching. You may en-
title yourself The Spy Espied. This court knows
everything that passed. If you would save your-
self, you have only to avow the facts."
"I am betrayed!" exclaimed Jacob, springing
up, with malicious hatred in his eyes. " But if
you have given me over to destruction, Walter
de Maulny, I will destroy you, in my turn. Sire,
the baron de Fougereuse is innocent of all crimes
with which he is charged. I can confirm it better
than any one, for I invented every one of them."
" False witness! " yelled Maulny. " Villepreux
has bribed you."
<pb>
" Have you so utterly lost the fear of God, mes-
sire?" asked Jacob, clasping his hands, in hypo-
critical alarm. " I am sorry for you, but I am
resolved to save my soul. It is bad enough to
risk hell for one's own sins, without shouldering
the sins of others! You have made me lie abomi-
nably. I am tired of that; and for once in my
life, I am going to be honest." Desiring to avenge
himself on Walter for his parsimony and his scorn,
pursued by the dread of the law, and impelled,
above all, to escape the gibbet, Jacob now studied
only how to win the royal pardon, by a thorough
declaration, and by an earnest of repentance. For
Lo'ic had reminded him that "this court knows
everything."
Therefore Piteux confessed, heaping up details
and proofs, anticipating questions, throwing re-
sponsibility upon his accomplice in order to free
himself, revealing all the particulars of the false-
hoods manufactured between them, shivering lest
he should omit one bit of evidence already familiar
to the judges, and ending by begging for mercy,
in a lamentable whine. The entire scaffolding of
calumnies, built up with such intelligent care,
crumbled piece by piece, under the eye of its de-
signer, until not a board of it remained standing.
Light began to break in on every man's mind.
The crowd listened, in a profound hush. Walter
de Maulny, dark and tongue-tied, quaked with
rage and humiliation. Lo'ic and Villepreux struck
hands, and looked meaningly at each other. Isa-
<pb>
belle's delicate and winsome face peered foith
eagerly from the draperies, and her eyes were shin-
ing with hope, through their tears. Guy, appar-
ently calmer than ever, followed the processes,
without taking part, with the curious attention be-
longing to a mere spectator, rather than with the
emotion of one personally concerned in them. His
expression was, for the moment, something in-
scrutable. The lords who were to decide the ver-
dict drew closer together: some were shocked and
indecisive, some shook their heads obstinately, and
only a few accepted frankly the data •which upset
all their prepossessions, and humbled their judi-
cial pride. They had been played with, and treated
as credulous children, or easy dupes. They would
yield to incontrovertible evidence alone, and would
admit their mistake only when driven to the final
extremity.
Jacob had at last done with his cowardly revela-
tions. The voice of Rene of Anjou arose, steady
and solemn : '• Walter de Maulny ! have you noth-
ing to say ?"
Maulny darted to the forefront of the platform,
steeled to attempt a desperate effort. Standing
in all his pride, braving the court, reckless of con-
sequences, cowing, by every look and gesture, his
miserable satellite who trembled before him, he
said:
" I request that yon clown be put to the torture :
ho would then talk after a different fashion. By
the eternal right! what outrage is this, gentle-
<pb>
men? Since when has a peasant's drivel been
considered as good as the oath of a knight?
Have you all determined to debase yourselves
with me, that you suffer the mob to pelt with mud
the escutcheon of the Maulnys? Are you content
to be the docile minions of Fougereuse, and let
him throw dust in your eyes ? Guy is jeering at
you now and here. He congratulates himself at
having gathered you together, that he might bid
you rend limb from limb a kinsman whom he
hates, and buy his immunity at that kinsman's
expense. Will you be blinded by this coarse arti-
fice? Will you acquit the prisoner, and let him
go free, without having produced an explanation
or a proof; maintaining his arrogant reserve; de-
livering my honor over to you, and carrying his
own counsel with him ? That would be to make
yourselves the laughing-stock of the populace, and
not without cause! "
"Halt there, fair cousin!" Guy began, striding
forward a little. " You lend me, gratuitous!}', in-
tentions which I never harbored. Nor do I know
what intimate relationship with you, on my part,
has authorized you to speak in my name. I have
no desire either to wrest your honor from you, nor
to jeer at my judges. I have promised to unfold to
them, in due season, my secrets, and that promise
I shall keep. Sire ! and you, my lords ! do you not
hear the clash of arms, and the shouting, in the
great courtyard outside ? It is my destiny, on its
way; in another instant it will be knocking at the
<pb>
door. "Remember that you brought it about! Let
it "be accomplished without opposition ! "
: Before Fougereuse had done speaking, a tumult
of-voices, loud, quick footsteps,: stern orders'and
demands, arose in the adjoining apartment. A
halberdier sergeant came to the threshold of the
audience hall, and uncovered his head. "My
dVead lord and King," he said, "the constables
sent to'search'.the .haunted house'and the palace
of. Fougereuse, have returned with their trophies,
and await your Majesty's pleasure."
. "Let them appear at once," was Renews answer;
"and. bring what they have found."
The sergeant turned to repeat the royal com-
mand, when he was energetically pushed aside by
a tall old man in a scarlet robe, whom the guards
had some difficulty in holding back. At the same
time a vibrant voice queried imperiously : "Is Guy
de Fougereuse safe and sound?,"
- -At this .spectacle, at this word, a distinct agi-
tation swept over the crowd, and communicated,
itself to the tribunal. The constables advanced,
escorting, two prisoners, one of whom was the her-
mit of Avrille wood. But upon his companion
every eye was riveted. That face and figure were
tin-own into noblest relief against the background
of duil-hued tapestries. A cry of amazement
leaped from every throat; then an impassioned
cheer, was launched by a .group of students, and
carried away the whole 'assembly on a wave of
frenzied enthusiasm.
<pb>
o
<pb>
"Antonio! Antonio Blandini!" . . . "Hail,
master!" . . . " Long life to the King of doc-
tors !" . . . " Evviva messer Antonio! . . . Ev-
viva il maestro ! "
Quite indifferent to his triumphant reception,
the new-comer hastened rapidly forward, preceding
the bailiff and the guards, and never vouchsafing
a look either at the lords in council or the people.
When he came to Fougereuse, he seized his hand,
and then turned towards the tribunal with a mag-
nificent movement, full of defiance and indignation.
" Condemn me with him, ye blind judges ! The
executioner has not his due number," Blandini
cried, imposing silence with his extended arm.
" You have but the pupil, and now I deliver over
to you the instructor! "
" Antonio!" a dozen on the raised floor ex-
claimed at once. ... " Is it indeed you, or your
ghost ?" . . . " Has some demon taken your
shape?" . . . "Where have you been living?"
... " What miracle brings you hither ? "
" You are welcome, dear and learned friend!"
added King Rene, whose old eyes kindled with a
ray of heartfelt joy. " We have longed greatly
to see you again. But how is it that my watch-
men restore you to me ? Does it rest with you, —
the key to this strange enigma ? "
"I pledge you my oath to clear Guy de Fou-
gereuse, sire! He is innocent of all treason, of
all necromancy, of all underhand dealings. The
baron's guest at the Devil's House, his mysterious
<pb>
comrade, stands before you: it is Antonio Blan-
dini."
The King made a gesture of incredulous sur-
prise. A long murmur of astonishment echoed
among the crowd.
" You! by all the saints, Antonio," numerous
voices protested; " what should you be doing in
that den?"
The physician seared with a lightning glance
the officers of the court. " Den! The dwelling
of the great Wolfram! You blaspheme, my lords.
Let me tell you that the duchy of Anjou and the
kingdom of Sicily are not worth the tenth part of
the treasures which that unjustly decried turret
chamber has yielded up. One small manuscript
of that misunderstood man of genius contains a
wealth of knowledge and a depth of-wisdom, un-
discovered by the divine Aristotle himself! . . .
But what is it to you? I forget that I speak to
the deaf. Fougereuse alone is able to understand;
and you have reputed it a crime in him! "
" Explain yourself clearly, master. Have you
spent there, in Wolfram's house, all the time which
has elapsed since your departure ? Why so strange
a retirement? It is an odd fancy: what is its
meaning ? What end, what interest, did it serve ? "
" Hear the truth, sire, and let God be the judge !
When I left your court, resolved to shake the dust
of Anjou from my sandals, you did everything in
your power to detain me; by promises, by prayers:.
perhaps you remember ? "
<pb>
"I do remember, Antonio. But you were in
flexible ! " said Rene with a sigh.
" You had opposed a rival to me ; you wished
to keep him beside you. My profession does not
admit of these dualities," continued Antonio, with
an Olympian frown. " I would have buried my-
self in the earth, sooner than pretend to authorize
the presence, and the methods, of Cornelius. On
the very morning when I was ready to sail away
on a ship lying in the river, my favorite pupil,
Guy de Fougereuse, came to beg me to delay the
voyage for a few days. He had lately bought the
hunting-lodge where the famous doctor Wolfram
lived and died, which was full of precious manu-
scripts, and he begged me to consent to examine
them with him. I let myself be persuaded, but
under the condition that it should be kept an.
inviolable secret: Guy swore to me to reveal to
no living soul, under any pretext, whatever might
befall, that I was still in Anjou. The following
night, I accompanied him to Wolfram's turret, and
I determined to stay there, where I might be able
to live in peace and privacy, while our researches
lasted. I do not even yet realize how the hours
and the days went by. . . Fougereuse had asked
me for a week, but the week has unfolded into six
long months, and we have not yet finished half of
our labors. Guy has seconded me with ardent
zeal, visiting me by day and by night, devoting to
me all his leisure, and with his quick intelligence
and his young eyes, helping out my old memory
<pb>
and my enfeebled sight. I never knew that he
was in training for a death at the stake! Could I
have known that my pupil was risking his life and
his reputation on my account, never would I have
suffered" —
"What! Did Fougereuse tell you nothing?
Did you suspect nothing?"
" Nothing, sire. Guy was silent as the grave, on
that subject; he did not allow me to dream that
there was the least shadow of danger. This holy
hermit, who was our only confidant, brought me,
this very morning, the first news I had had of my
young friend's misfortune. While I learned, with
a shudder, that Fougereuse had been arrested as a
poisoner, and thrown into a dungeon; and that
he was to be arraigned for sorcery, and, in all like-
lihood, condemned to capital punishment, your
officers, sire, broke into my dwelling, crying:
' Death to the magician !' As soon as they recog-
nized me, they drew back, astounded; yet they
had to obey orders. Tney searched the turret,
overhauling my manuscripts; they seized upon us
two as circumstantial proof, and brought us hither
. . . The rest you know. I bless Heaven'for it,
that I have arrived in time to save you from com-
mitting a murderous injustice! "
Antonio's noble character for disinterestedness
and sincerity, forbade all doubt as to the truth of
-his testimony. He was too religious to have the
black art even indirectly laid to his charge; and
for that matter the presence of the good monk of
<pb>
Avrille would, of itself, be enough to drive away
suspicion. The judges were taken aback and
startled; but they were not satisfied. Such a
simple ending to so complex a matter overturned
their preconceived ideas, and left them in a strange
perplexity. Was it possible that this was all there
was to the secret of Fougereuse, and that Antonio
had offered them the clue to the formidable comedy?
Guy could not repress a smile, observing the
embarrassment of the court. The men about him
sat in bitter vexation before their mute defendant,
their breathing Sphinx, who would neither confess
nor explain, but left to events themselves the task
of pleading his cause. " If you have laid a wager,
baron de Fougereuse," William de la Bohalle ex-
claimed abruptly, "say so, and have done with
your smiling ! Truly, this passes comprehension :
that you should weave such a web of mystery, get
yourself apprehended and tried, and formally con-
voke a jury of your peers, all in order to inf orm us
that you are taking lessons of the learned Antonio!
This to make a mock of the whole Angevin aris-
tocracy, and you owe us satisfaction for it."
"You shall shortly have it, messire," Fouge-
reuse answered gravely. "Hitherto I have held
my peace, that my friends and foes might speak
their fill. But I feel, as you do, that it is tims to
sum up. Antonio has told you his half of the
truth; but the secret of my life I alone can utter.
Now listen: for what you shall hear is known to
but one man living besides myself."
<pb>
Appeased by these words, the tribunal ceased all
conversation, and the old King leaned forward ex-
pectantly. Guy recollected himself for an instant.
His heart beat furiously; his voice shook as he
began.
" First of all, my sovereign lord, I ought to im-
plore your pardon. You have believed me your
servant, attached to you alone : a leal vassal, be-
longing to you in body and soul, with no ambition
but to live and die in your employ."
" Well ? " Rene ejaculated, growing pale.
" For three years, sire, I have served a master
other than Rene of Anjou."
" Traitor ! Felon! " .cried some of the judges.
And the King, uplifting his eyes to the Crucifix in
the hall, cast on it a resigned look, and murmured
only: " Ah, Guy ! you also."
" I beseech your Majesty to hear me out! My
fault, if it be a fault, cannot now be atoned for:
it is forever. For a long while I resisted the call
of my new King ; I strove with his ambassadors; 1
intrenched myself strongly upon the faith which
I had sworn to you, and on my duties as your sub-
ject and your minister ; and my spirit rose against
the thought of forsaking you. . . . But to-day
the battle is over. I am persuaded, defeated, con-
quered. An attempt to retain me would be use-
less. I would choose torments and exile, sooner
than delay my response to my true liege; nor even
in death could I be separated from him. My lord
Ren6 of Anjou, I am yours no more ! I implore
you to release me from my allegiance."
<pb>
This singular apostrophe gave the hearers a
sense of uneasiness. Each man among them felt
that it clothed some hidden meaning, with which
Guy alone was conversant. The King made a
little gesture of weary disgust and sorrow. " Go,
then, Fougereuse," he said, " go rejoin the master
whom you prefer to me. I grudge him not the
homage of a perjured courtier, and I absolve you
from an allegiance so grossly violated. You are
no longer my knight, and I am no longer your sov-
ereign. . . . Unto treachery I am only too well
accustomed!" Rene ended with a sigh of poi-
gnant sincerity, as if he found himself sadly at
home there.
"Dear and venerated sire," replied the baron,
laboring under more emotion than he cared to
show, "when I shall have told you who he is that
summons me, you will not reproach me. You will
think, rather, that I, who withstood him for three
whole years, must have loved you with a great and
loyal love. For you, I would have given my life;
for him, I would sacrifice forever, and without a
regret, all that may be more dear than life itself:
family affections, wealth, glory, honor, freedom!
I value these only inasmuch as I may throw them
at his feet. I covet labor and suffering for his
sake; and my one desire is to see every knee bow
when his name is spoken."
"The name of Louis of France! " Rene* added,
with a bitter smile.
"The name, sire, of the King of Heaven: the
<pb>
name of Our Saviour Jesus, who died upon the
Cross, and rose again the third day: my Mas-
ter and your Master, my God and your God. I
have vowed to Him my life, and my regained
liberty. . . . And there you have the secret of
Guy de Fougereuse."
Of all possible conclusions, this was the most
unexpected. A thunderbolt, fallen in the middle
of the assembly, could not have caused greater
consternation. The Abbot of Saint-Aubin was
seen to leave the balcony reserved for the clergy,
cross the enclosure, and hasten to place himself at
Guy's side. With an authoritative motion, he
laid his hand on the young baron's shoulder, then
addressed the King and the court. "I, Brother
Maurice, of the Order of Saint Benedict, declare
that this man, by his solemn promises, belongs to
Christ and to His Church. I claim him as a pos-
tulant of our community, whom no earthly power
can longer withhold from God. . . . Finish your
task, my son, and may Our Lady help you ! "
There was a thrill of emotion felt wherever the
monk's words were audible. The students saluted
reverently; the people crossed themselves, invok-
ing the saints; the backbiters were hushed; and.
Walter de Maulney bowed his head in defeat and
shame. The monarch beckoned to his old favor-
ite, who came to the foot of the throne, but did
not mount the steps. " Why is it, Guy, that you
chose to act with such secrecy, such a lack of con-
fidence in me? Why?"
<pb>
" Sire, now you ask of me a real confession! but
I mean to obey you. A vow of my own held me
silent, until God Himself should set me free.
Many ties of duty bound me to the secular world,
and they were well-nigh inextricable. My orphan
sister had need of her brother; my King said that
he had need of his minister. Though I lived
detached from ambition and from the pursuit of
pleasure, I had my dream of being useful; still
more, of being loved. But God called me inces-
santly, and that Voice, now imperative, now
plaintive, followed me equally into the festival
hall, or upon an errand of mercy. I spent my
fortune and my strength, I multiplied my vows
and vigils, hoping thereby to ransom my future;
and all in vain. My Creator would have from me
no gift less, or other, than myself. There came
the day when I said to Him: 'Here am I. If
Thou hast chosen me, break, with Thine own
hand, my chains. I promise to seek no aid but
Thine, nor to make known Thy dealings with me
to any man, until the last barrier is down! ' That
promise, sire, I have kept, as you know. I will
not remind you how it was borne out. The Divine
Will scattered to the four winds of heaven my
friendships, my good fame, my high station; it
suffered my career to be overclouded, my Christian
faith questioned, my liberty taken from me, my
life put in jeopardy. Isabelle's lover returned
from the Holy Land; I was able to reclaim for
him his long-promised bride. AVhat held me back ?
<pb>
One last link, stronger than all: your affection,
and my fidelity. God and you strove with each
other in my breast. While I besought you so
passionately to believe in my innocence, I was
still undecided. My destiny was in your hands;
with one little word you might have secured your
vassal. But Our Lady had compassion on my
weakness : that was not to be. When I could not
convince you, I leaped the gulf. For when I was
driven to ask for a trial, then the spell was broken,
and Our Lord Christ had no rival in my heart."
"Guy! "Rene exclaimed pathetically.
"I do not mean to reproach you, sire, or to re-
proach any one. I am at peace with those who
abandoned me, and I forgive my detractors. Nor
do I complain of the ordeal: sinc.e it taught me
what men are worth. Let me, however, do rever-
ence, in passing, to two among those noble hearts
whose loyalty to me never wavered. Robert de
Villepreux, Lo'ic de Kernis, you mistrusted not
your friend, when the world overwhelmed him;
you sacrificed yourselves to him in his adversity.
May God bless you! "
The baron's voice broke. His features, hitherto
under perfect control, contracted, in a spasm of
tender feeling. Forgetful of King, jury, specta-
tors, he held out either hand to Robert and to
Lo'ic, with a look more eloquent than words. That
warm, silent grasp, held the three together for a
moment, under the eyes of the troubled assembly.
"I beg pardon of your Majesty," Guy continued,
<pb>
" but these two have risked much for my sake, and
lost. . . . What is there yet, that you would ask
of me, my lords? Antonio has unravelled for you
the ittystery of the haunted house. You see now
why I was in love with science! My celebrated
little room at home awaits explanation: the room
without lock or key. It was sacked. What did
you find, sergeant?"
" I should have thought I was in a monk's cell,
my lord! I found a fresco of the Crucifixion on
the wall; a hard, narrow bed, a mere straw pallet;
a missal; and this chest. We were not able to
open it."
Guy put his finger on one of the ironwork or-
naments of the carven coffer which the soldiers
brought him. The four sides, opening all at once,
dropped back with a din, and several dark, indis-
tinct objects fell out upon the floor.
" You made no error then, my good fellow," said
Fougereuse to the sergeant, motioning to him to
gather the contents together. " It was indeed a
monk's cell; and here are the monk's habit, his
cowl, his book of hours, his rosary, and his in-
struments of penance. For a year past, the Right
Reverend Abbot has allowed me to follow the
Rule, by myself, and to wear the dress of the
Benedictine novices, during the hours dedicated
to study and to prayer. Now, I had only my nights
to give to study and prayer. This parchment is
the plan of a hospice which I had hoped to build
in my own domain, and of which the hermit of
<pb>
Avrille was to be Superior. And, finally, this
picture is a copy of Our Lady of Pity, destined
for the monastery of Saint-Aubin. These are the
items of my treasury. Are you satisfied, gentle-
men ? For Guy de Fougereuse has no more secrets
to conceal!" He paused an instant; then folded
his arms, raised his head, and added: "Pronounce
my sentence."
The nobles, brought spontaneously to their feet,
declared in unison that Fougereuse was innocent,
and that the charges against him were withdrawn.
The people broke forth in a transport of joy and
triumph, and the students' cheers made the rafters
ring. It was no mere acquittal, but such an ova-
tion as few monarchs have received. One cry,
however, was heard jarring upon the general en-
thusiasm ; and it turned many a shout of gladness
into a threat and a curse. Maulny had tried to
escape from the enclosure, but Loic blocked his
way.
"Arrest the traitor!" he cried. "Seneschal,
seneschal ! " White and exhausted, but still sus-
tained by his indomitable spirit, Walter kept his
haughty aspect. Though he was fain to speak,
his voice was drowned in the mTitterings of the
angered crowd. u Let us have justice ! Let us
revenge Fougereuse!" was clamored on every
side.
" You must have some quarry to tear to pieces,
dogs of Angers!" was Maulny's answer. "Your
motto is: ' Woe to the vanquished.1' I would have
<pb>
you know that I can have no judges here, for
these are my accomplices."
Indignant protests greeted the insulting phrase.
The aged King started, and drew himself up with
severe dignity.
" Be your own judge, then, and declare your
own sentence, Walter de Maulny! You are con-
victed of imposture, of calumny, of false witness,
of indirect attack upon the life of a kinsman. I
give you your choice between a degradation from
knighthood, imprisonment, or banishment. De-
cide : and consider that you are fortunate to have
escaped death."
" Your Majesty is most generous. I choose
banishment. I have lost the game, and I quit,
like an honest player. This very evening, I take
the road to Tours. Your star is up again, Fouge-
reuse ; but we shall meet hereafter. . . . Bah!
what would you do? ... I forbid you to seek
pardon for me. Exile is welcome. I expatriate
myself without a regret."
" Have him removed!" commanded Rene".
The constables escorted Maulny to the doorway
of the hall. An instant later, he was without.
The schemer had parted forever with his ambi-
tious dreams. Philip de Beau van'alone, among
the nobles on the platform, noticed that Cornelius
also had disappeared. He said to himself : " The
hand of Louis XI. is in all this!"
" Baron Guy de Fougereuse !" exclaimed the
King, " you are declared victor in the struggle.
<pb>
Your slanderer is punished, your honor is vindi-
cated ; your sovereign and your equals in rank
heartily admit their error, and deplore it. A
traitor has shaken our good faith ; yet God forbid
that we should have wrought injustice wilfully!
We are eager to atone for our moods of blind
folly. Favor, estates, position, all are yours once
more ; my esteem for your character is greater
than ever ; and my affection, estranged for an
hour, is frankly offered you for the second time.
You have leisure and opportunity to forget the
past! " The good Rene was moved; he continued
kindly. " Reflect, before you bury your youth
alive in the cloister, and throw away your splendid
future. Remember, Guy, that your career has
barely begun: life spreads before you, full of
promise and of hope."
" It is so indeed, sire : promises which are sure,
hopes which fail not," Fougereuse replied: " the
only perfect things. My future is eternity, Hea-
ven is my heritage, and Christ my King. You
have absolved me from my vassalage; nor will I
renew it, save to God alone. . . . My Father,
put an end, I beseech you, to these importunities,"
Guy added, seeing several members of his family
conspiring, with the King, to raise objections.
" Give me, without delay, the livery of the ser-
vants of Jesus Christ. I seem to have won the
right to it, as it were at the point of the sword ! "
" To-morrow, my son, at the Abbey, after a night
of meditation and of rest."
<pb>
" Nay, to-day, Father, now, here! after a ay of
agony and battle. God calls me ; bid Him not to
wait." Throwing himself at the feet of the Abbot
of Saint-Aubin, he ended imploringly: "Would
you delay, you must answer for my soul!"
The prudent deliberation of Dom Maurice had
to yield to the prayers and the strong will of his
postulant. The priceless jewels which Guy wore,
and his decorations, were cast heedlessly on the
floor; his brilliant court costume was replaced by
the black Benedictine habit; his wavy blond hair
was shorn away, while that forehead, lately held
so high before King Ren<3 and his tribunal, was
bowed humbly before the poor obscure man of
God.
The baron Guy de Fougereuse had knelt him
down, melancholy, and sore in spirit from his re-
cent warfare; but Brother John rose up in great
peace, and radiant with happiness, amid the weep-
ing assembly. At a sign from the King, he ran
up the steps of the platform, and bent his knee
before the aged prince, with tenderest respect.
Ren6 clasped him in his arms, and yearned over
him like a father embracing his son for the last
time. The judges, standing, pressed about the
comrade they were now to lose. Isabelle came
too, close to her brother, weeping with pride and
love and sorrow. Guy was saved: but the sepa-
ration was at hand, to weigh upon her tender,
girlish heart.
"No, sire, no. I beseech you, dear and royal
<pb>
master! " Fougereuse was saying, in the endeavor
to arrest upon Rene''s lips some expressions of
remorse and contrition. " Be not depressed, and
do not accuse yourself; for God has wrought in
all. I go from you, bearing you a most grateful
affection, and blessed in being cleared so fully, in
your eyes, from every shadow of blame. Yester-
day you offered me your pardon; let me ask for it
to-day, on my knees. You have suffered through
me; and on my account others have offended you.
Sire, may I demand mercy? The culprit is dear
to me : he is my true friend, and the affianced
lover of my sister. Robert has his moments of
revolt; but I know not how he can live, under the
resentment of his beloved liege. I entreat you to
overlook his fault!"
" Let him come to me," Rene replied. " I recall
nothing now, save his heroic devotion to your
cause. . . . Nearer, Villepreux ! I forgive your
rudeness. Be as loyal, ever, as you are." And
as Robert threw himself at the King's feet, kissing
the hand graciously held out to him, the latter
turned to Isabelle.
" My lady and dear child, you are the last of the
race of Fougereuse, and as such, you owe the
crown a vassal's fealty. Your father and your
brother conquered new territory in my name: will
you not win and keep for me the intrepid heart of
the Lion? I see that he is yours, and I trust you
for it! You have mourned long enough, Isabelle.
Let me hear you laugh and sing again, and let me
<pb>
reclaim my right to lead you to the altar on your
marriage morning. . . . Guy, my best Angevin,
whom I so wronged! go; for I give you up to
Him who needs you. Obey His voice, with my
leave, and my benediction. And remember to
pray for me at the feet of Jesus Christ Our Lord."
The peers bade Fougereuse farewell, as if they
had never known a hostile thought against him.
As the brilliant favorite withdrew from the arena,
rivals and foemen acknowledged his virtues, and
vied with one another in his praise. With perfect
serenity, he listened to protestations and regrets,
or cut short an exhibition of sentiment real or
feigned. Brother John had already forgotten the
grievances of the baron de Fougereuse. He was
less eager to hear eulogy and lament, than to have
them hushed and ended. Yet it was otherwise
with him, when he passed through the crowd of
men and women in tears, among whom were his
own sorrow-stricken vassals, beseeching him not
to leave them. He disengaged himself from their
hold, and resisted their pleadings; but it was with
wet eyelashes and a throbbing heart, that to their
cry of " Pray for us, servant of the Lord! " he an-
swered : " Pray for me, dear poor: we shall not
live apart."
At last the palace threshold was reached, the
strife was done, the victory gained, when a hand
touched that of Brother John, and a voice whis-
pered: "I may go with you, may I not? You
said I might."
<pb>
" Lo'ic ! What do you ask ? "
" Only to follow you, to the end. I was a page,
where you were a knight; and where you are to
be a monk, let me be a novice ! "
Dom Maurice said to him: "Come, my child."
<pb>
EPILOGUE.
OUR LADY OF PITY.
" If thy brother who hatli offended thee ask not thy pardon,
beg thine of him: for so shalt thou lead him back to God."
SAINT FRANCIS OF Assist.
IT was near the end of April; Anjou was re-
clothed in "its liveries of laughing green. The
new leaves shot forth under the dark twigs of box
and holly; buds spread along the branches which
winter had laid bare; the ditches were carpeted
with wild strawberry vines, the fields with daisies,
and the woods with blue violets. Dawn whitened
the horizon, and the earth seemed happy at her
awaking. The morning lark had begun his sweet
concert for the laborer; the huntsman held out his
fist for the falcon to light upon, and rode gayly
through the thickets. But ahead of the watchful
song-bird, ahead of the impatient horn of the
chase, the chime of the Priory of Our Lady of
Pity had already greeted the unrisen sun. The
monks were in choir for the office of Prime, prais-
ing and blessing that God who has cast over the
natural universe the ray of His love, and the re-
flection of His divine beauty. In the footpaths
of the valley, many pilgrims were hastening on-
</div>
<pb>
<div id="our lady of pity" code="4" wordcount="18124">
ward, that they might not miss the first Mass.
For it was the Feast of Saint Dismas, the Peni-
tent Thief, patron of the hospice with which
Robert cle Villepreux had endowed the monastery,
and where the sick, and strangers, were received
as if sent of God. It was the day of bounties to
the poor, and of happy opportunity to the rich:
a day of joy for both. The little military troop,
preceded by its own banner of three crosses sable
on a gold ground, marched through an admiring
crowd, and took its customary place in the chapel.
Robert de Villepreux, in a gleaming coat of mail,
his helmet on his head, his sword strapped at his
side, stood before the altar. The standard, carried
by the faithful Vincent Govier, was unfurled in
the choir; and four of the Thieves, lance in hand,
stood around it, sentinel-like. Between the little
pillars of her pew in the gallery, might be seen
the sweet face of Isabelle de Villepreux in all
its touching loveliness, and with the added grace
which happy wives and mothers wear. At either
side of her, a baby head bobbed inquisitively up
and down, one dark and eager, one blond and shy :
Amaury and Yvette, nicknamed, by the Thieves,
the Lion-cub and the Gazelle; Isabelle's tender
care, and their father's joy and pride.
The candles were lit, one by one, around the
reredos of the altar: the Cross of Christ, rising
triumphantly between the crosses of the Good and
Bad Thief, standing out from the rich hangings of
dark red velvet behind. Then a side door opened
<pb>
quietly, and the friars came up into the sanctuary,
filing two by two, in silence and recollection,
wrapped in their black habits, and the ample
Benedictine cowl. They reached their stalls, and
prostrated themselves, in the attitude of profound
adoration. The Father Prior came last, in his
priestly vestments, accompanied by a young novice
with an open countenance and very bright eyes.
This was Brother Louis de Kernis, whose turn it
was to serve the Mass of Dom John, once Guy de
Fougereuse. His six years spent in the cloister
had not altered Guy's aspect of health, nor over-
shadowed it; a new youth seemed to have been
given him for the service of his Lord. In vain,
now, might one search at the corners of his mouth
for that little sarcastic curl of the lip which was
so frequent with the favorite of Ren<3 of Anjou.
The habit of prayex had given a slight forward in-
clination to the haughty forehead, and long vigils
before the tabernacle, and penitential austerities,
had made it pale. The yoke of obedience and of
humility had left on the proud gentleman the
monastic stamp. A steadfast serenity, an inex-
haustible meekness, replaced, in the Prior of Our
Lady of Pity, the mocking indifference of the
courtier of long ago. Every man who saw or
heard him, knew that he was in possession of that
deep and blessed peace which this world knows
not, and with which God fills to overflowing the
hearts of His own. As for Lo'ic, his exterior
change was much more marked than that of the
<pb>
knight his master, and many a one failed to guess
that this was the same adventurous page, in the
garb of a novice of Saint Benedict; yet, in reality,
the spiritual transformation was far less thorough.
The expression of his face was stilled and softened,
the roguish bearing overlaid with seriousness and
submission; yet now and then a smile, a tone, a
look, a jest, would reveal the fiery nature beneath,
which Divine Grace had seized like a glowing
coal, and given to the Lord, undivided and for-
ever. Mass began to the chant of the favorite
stanza of the Penitent Thieves, which was re-
peated by the crowded congregation:
Tu latronem exaudisti,
Tu Mariarn absolvisti:
Miki quoque spem dedisti.
(" Thou the sinful Mary savest;
Thou the dying Thief forgavest.
And to me a hope vouchsafes!.")
The monks answered in Our Lord's words:
Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso,
(This day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise!)
sung very low, in harmonies of merciful tenderness
and sublime consolation. When the solemn mo-
ment of the Elevation came, the little bell sounded,
and every brow bent to the ground, under its bur-
den of suffering or of repented sin. Which of us
has not been bowed beneath the one or the other?
<pb>
But the Comforter, the Pardoner, is present at the
Holy Sacrifice, in the hands of His priest; and
through them will He give Himself to these fail-
ing hearts, and fill them with light, strength, and
quiet.
Robert, first of all, received the Sacred Host,
with such faith, simple and deep, as the centurion
had of old. Then came his men-at-arms, in respect-
ful piety, and last, the multitude of pilgrims; all
ages, ranks, and occupations sharing in the Chris-
tian union. Isabelle de Villepreux, the noble lad}',
knelt near a poor old beggar in rags; homespun
touched velvet; the soldier elbowed the peasant;
gentlefolk were mingled with apprentices, children
with graybeards. Youth, beauty, fortune, glory,
fame,— all vanished away, all effaced themselves
before the hidden God, whose infinite love comes
hither to claim the poor, weak love of His own
creatures.
" May the Body of Our Lord Jesus Christ pre-
serve thy soul unto life everlasting ! " The Prior
had breathed this prayer over the last of the com-
municants at the Holy Table, and the latter had
but just answered " Amen! " when suddenly a com-
motion arose at the lower end of the nave. The
cry: " Sanctuary ! sanctuary ! " a hoarse, desperate
shout, rang like the appeal of some being in his
agony. The sea of people fell apart at once, and
left a passage clear for a man, covered with blood,
who had flung himself into the church. " Sanc-
tuary! sanctuary!" he repeated, rushing towards
<pb>
the chancel like a wild boar at bay. " Sanctuary !
in the name of the Holy Mother of God ! "
A confused murmur began among the crowd.
Dom John stretched forth his hand as a pledge
of protection towards him who asked asylum of
Our Lady of Pity. "The Holy Mother of God
will shelter you, my son," he said.
At the sound of his voice, the stranger trembled
violently, and drew back, turning full on the Prior
his haggard face and demonic eyes. " Guy de
Fougereuse ! " he cried; " it is always Fouge-
reuse ! " He brought his hand to his head in a sort
of frenzy, tottered, and fell, with a stifled moan,
on the paving.
Dom John was paler than the wounded man.
Kneeling beside him, he raised his head, and tried
to staunch the blood which gushed from a gaping
wound in the unhappy fugitive's breast. " Walter!
... O Lord! accord me his life."
The right of sanctuary, one of the most admir-
able tilings devised by the Church in times of
bloodshed and persecution, was still respected in
the fifteenth century. Nevertheless, many who
dared not brave the law, nor expose themselves
to the excommunication which devolved upon the
violators of a sanctuary precinct, scrupled not to
employ base means, in order to lure their enemies
beyond the recognized place of refuge. Whither
the dagger or the headsman's axe could not pene-
<pb>
trate, poison could pass; it did pass, indeed, the
gratings of the cloister. Louis XI., according to
the chroniclers of the time, was never so much of
a devotee, as when he had some treasonable end in
view. He multiplied his pious offices toward the
Abbeys, and feigned to venerate ecclesiastical rule;
yet those there whom it was his policy to condemn,
in no wise escaped their doom. The miserable
death of his own brother, Duke Charles of Guy-
enne, poisoned in the Abbey of Saint John at
Angely, was a sinister instance.
There were reasons why the Prior of Our Lady
of Pity was unlikely to stand in the good graces
of the crafty monarch. The merciless hate of
Walter de Maulny had not busied itself in vain.
Banished by Rene of Anjou, and defeated by Guy
de Fougereuse, Walter had sworn to be revenged
on both; and he had kept his oath only too well.
Rene's aforetime minister was received favorably
by the King of France, and for six years he was
his secret agent: the director of all the underhand
dealings, the wicked spites, the course of hateful
annoyances which ended by leaving Anjou in the
hands of Louis XI. Ren6, harassed on every
side, abandoned and betrayed, a childless father,
a powerless monarch, loaded with anxieties and
mortifications in his old age, let himself be over-
borne, for very weariness. The loss of his son, the
gallant Duke John, and the tragic end of his grand-
son, Edward of Lancaster, stabbed, after the battle
of Tewkesbury by the Yorkist princes who had
<pb>
defeated his cause, left the venerable King without
direct heirs. Margaret of Anjou, heartstricken by
the death of her husband, the unfortunate Henry
VI. of England, and, above all, by the horrible
murder of her only son, had withdrawn to the
solitude of a manor-house at Reculee, to deplore
those dear ones, who here below had been her life
and hope. Her sister Yolande, the Duchess of Lor-
raine, had already passed away, and her son, Rene
of Vaudemont, was heir equally to the house of
Anjou, and to that of Vaudemont in Lorraine. Two
nephews remained to the King: Charles of Maine,
the son of his brother, and Louis of France, the
son of his sister. Provence was to fall to Charles;
Louis XI. was to inherit Anjou. But the greedy
monarch determined to possess his own portion
even during the lifetime of his uncle. His craft
and pertinacity, aided by the strategic intelligence
of Maulny, achieved the desired end. A factional
riot, and the complicity of William de la Cerizaie,
captain of the town forces, delivered Angers into
the hands of the King of France, in the year 1473.
Rene had to yield; and he sailed away, with tears, >
to his beloved Provence, the last resting-place for
his white head and his weary heart. But he has
still in Anjou some devoted partisans, and in the
foremost rank of them stood Guy de Fougereuse,
who, generously abetted by Villepreux, had built
the monastery of Our Lady of Pity, and had just
been appointed its first Prior. The suspicions of
King Louis, directed by Maulny, lit upon both
<pb>
Prior and convent, and they became the objects
of constant persecution.
Every day brought its fresh conflict and trial.
The unchanging loyalty of Dom John to the dis-
possessed Rene, his firm, uncompromising attitude
towards the emissaries of Louis, his refusal to put
at his Majesty's service his own great influence
with the people; — these things were considered
equivalent to the crime of high treason. The
humble retreat of fervent religious was denounced
as a nest of conspirators, and subjected to sharp
espionage, such as even the vigilance of Villepreux
and his fearless Thieves could not always foil.
Were it not that Louis XI. cherished a secret hope
that he should win the Prior over to his cause,
either by threats or promises, there is no doubt
that Maulny's hatred would have succeeded in
obtaining his enemy's death-warrant. Such were,
at any rate, Walter's Satanic plans; and lo! at the
very apex of his career of triumph, the hand of
God touched him, and threw him, disarmed and
dying, at the feet of his victim; without hope, save
in the chivalry of an outraged kinsman, without
defence, save the bulwark of protection afforded
by the holy walls he had done his best to destroy.
The chamber into which the sick refugee was
carried, was a crypt cut in the living rock, below
the chapel. It communicated, by several passages,
with the interior of the monastery, and, in turn,
-
<pb>
gave it access to the underground ways which
led to the Loire. It was, indeed, a little house of
refuge; more than one proscribed man had owed
his salvation to it. A bedpost hung with antique,
faded curtains, a stone table, a few stools, diversely
shaped, comprised the furniture of the half-dark-
ened room, which sunlight reached only through
the narrow fissures of the rock.
Walter slept an unrestful, feverish sleep. The
monks who watched over him walked so softly
and spoke so low, that hardly a sound was audible.
The hermit of Avrille, now known as Father
Andrew of the Cross, was carefully preparing, by
the light of a lamp, a beverage which he had
brought from the infirmary. Brother Louis, seated
near the foot of the bed, was passing the beads of
his rosary through his fingers. His lips murmured
Ave after Ave: but his eyes, roving anxiously from
the patient to the Father Prior, bespoke a rush
of emotion and of memory which had not their
source in prayer. Dora John was standing, with
joined hands, his face showing with what deep
feeling he gazed upon the sufferer beside him,
whose features were white and livid against the
dark draperies. With infinite compassion the Prior
looked down on the old comrade of his boyhood,
the man of his own blood and lineage, who was
fostered and educated under the same roof. Maul-
ny's treachery had already been pardoned by the
heart of the cousin and the friend; but who can
say what was passing, at that moment, through the
<pb>
heart of the religious? Before that soul, ransomed
by the blood of Jesus Christ; hanging, as if by a
miracle, over the very jaws of Hell, and divided, it
might be, by a few moments' time, from God's
searching judgment; before that soul, which a
touch, a sigh, could save, and yet which a word
could lose forever, what was the agonj of the
priest! Bitter remembrances lived no longer, nor
wounds gone by. A spirit was in danger of eter-
nal death: this alone appealed to the Prior of Our
Lady of Pity, moved him to the depths, wrung
from him a prayer strong enough to overreach
Divine Justice itself. For having sinned against
him, Walter became, now, to him, the more dear;
since he felt it his sacred right to fold the guilty
one in the mantle of forgiveness, and to force, in
his behalf, the mercies of God.
Across the silence of the chamber where mortal
pain hovered, a brisk step resounded from the
stair, and the door leading to the chapel was
thrust open by an incautious hand. Dom John
frowned, and advanced quickly to the newcomer,
hushing him with a decisive gesture.
"But I must speak with you!" said the voice
of Villepreux.
" Then speak with me here," answered the
Prior, passing out into a narrow corridor, and
gently closing the door. " Walter would be in the
gravest danger, were we to wake him."
The knight and the monk found themselves in
a sort of natural grotto of curious conformation,
<pb>
arched irregularly, and lit only by a hanging lamp,
which resembled those kept burning in burial
vaults. Robert's coat-of-mail gleamed in" the dark,
and threw off little fantastic reflections, under the
flickering light poured upon it. Dora John's black
habit and cowl were indistinguishable against the
sombre wails, but his features, pale, thoughtful,
and pure, seemed to draw to themselves every ray
of light, and shine as if within an aureole.
" I have important news, dear friend," Robert
began eagerly. " We have got ourselves into a
terrible hole. Maulny is not the victim of an as-
sassination, but of an execution ! "
Fougereuse's clear eyes expressed no surprise.
"I feared as much," he replied.
" He is a condemned man, who has no legal right
to exist, but who has broken away from his fate,"
continued Villepreux. " He was struck down,
under orders of Louis XI., by the hirelings of
Tristram 1'Hermite. Word had been given to
sew up the body in a sack, and cast it into the
river."
" Ah, the royal code ! He has escaped it."
" But Maulny was on the alert. It seems that
he defended himself desperately, killing or wound-
ing two of his assailants, and forcing the others to
desist. You know nobody is so skilful as he at an
ambuscade. Well, he profited by the momentary
confusion of his murderers to throw himself into
the church crying ' Sanctuary !' and Tristram's
bravos did not dare to pursue him, in the sight
<pb>
of the people. Now, the difficulty has only changed
its color. Louis of France is set upon having this
man's life; and he may command you to deliver
him over to-morrow! I learned this from one
of those who attacked Walter; he is grievously
wounded himself. In fact, my Thieves found him
in a dying condition on the Three Crosses road,
and bore him away."
" I thank you, Robert," the Prior said, looking
down. " All this is a very serious matter." And
in the pause that followed, Dom John fell into
meditation, praying God to assist him, while Rob-
ert awaited his instructions, without further speech.
Before abdicating his natal rights over Anjou,
Rene had transferred to Our Lady of Pity the sov-
ereignty of the domains of Villepreux and Fouge-
reuse. Thenceforth, the Lion figured as the first
subject of the monasteryvand paid his feudal hom-
age to its Prior. Never did ruler exact so little,
and see himself so perfectly obeyed, nor ask so
seldom, and receive so often, and so much. The
faithfulness of the friend, and the vassal's loyalt}',
were welded together with the Christian's respect,
and it was easy for the great heart of Villepreux
to submit to the gentleness of Fougereuse.
" This hireling, this wounded man," Dom John
went on presently, " did he tell you for what rea-
son King Louis had suddenly condemned Walter,
his best and most able counsellor, to such a death?
It is a prompt revulsion, Robert: too prompt not
to call for comment."
<pb>
" I have had that thought, too," Villepreux re-
sponded, lowering his voice ; " and I questioned
the man closely. He swore that he was not aware
of the King's motives: that the King is not in the
habit of confiding his motives to the butchers whom
he employs. Who, in all the world knows, for
certain, the mind of Louis of France? He has
never scrupled to break a tool after he has used it.
I suspect that Maulny was playing two parts, and
carrying on intrigues with Brittany, where the
French yoke meets with small favor. And what
master has Maulny not betrayed? However it
be, King Louis has avenged King Rene", and roj*al
justice, for once, is the justice of God."
The Prior's countenance became sorrowful and
severe. "Justice!" he repeated. "Is it justice
to come secretly upon a human creature, and exe-
cute him before he understands that any sentence
stands against him? Is it the justice of the most
Christian King, to speed a soul to the Judgment-
seat on high, without allowing him a moment for
repentance ? What, then, would be considered
cruelty, did infidels ordain it? And you, a Cru-
sader, Robert, talk thus to me: you, my brother!"
"Would you plead in Maulny's behalf?" cried
Villepreux excitedly. " Have you a good word to
say for that man whose life is made up of deceit,
who is a stain upon the whole order of knight-
hood? Surely, he merits another sort of requital!
A prince who is set upon punishing ought to pun-
ish openly. And yet there are criminals too vile
<pb>
for the block. It is not that which Walter de-
serves, but degradation and the stake. His pres-
ence here soils the sanctuary ! "
" Enough, Robert. The miserable being is
crushed now under his own disgrace and misery.
Have you no pity ? "
" Had Maulny any pity on you ?" cried the
Lion, carried away by his growing indignation and
disgust.
The Prior looked at him, and sighed. "Ah, you
children of the century ! How one loses one's
labor, preaching to you the Gospel of Christ! . . .
Take your Thieves with j'ou, Robert, and return
to your own castle. I and the community will
guard the altar, and defend our guest as we are
bound to do, by prudence and prayer, and, if so
it must be, by our blood, shed in maintaining the
rights of Holy Church. Our Lady will give us
help."
" Be not unjust to me, Guy. You know well
that nothing will ever separate us from you! But
before entering upon a struggle with the King,
before imperilling your own head and the freedom
of your friars, in order to save a wretch, let us see
if you cannot obtain your end by less difficult
means. My business is to protect you and watch
over you; and I discharge it by exempting this
monastery from the wrath of King Louis. Listen:
give Walter to me. I will have him taken pri-
vately to Villepreux; and I swear to deliver him
to you safe and sound, as soon as the danger shall
<pb>
have passed away. Why do you hesitate? What
is there to fear? Under my roof, my o\vn little
son Amaury would not be more secure."
"I believe it, my dear brother; and with all my
heart I do homage to your generous intention.
But it would be only Walter's ruin, and your ruin
as well. There is but one obstacle which can de-
ter Louis of France: respect for holy precincts. If
he dares brush that aside, nothing will hold him
back thereafter. For me, whatever befalls, I must
act as a religious should act. Walter de Maulny
is a Christian in distress, who has claimed sanctu-
ary in Our Lady of Pity's chapel. He is under her
patronage, and there he shall remain. No human
power should constrain me to violate his priv-
ilege. A monk, after all, should not be troubled
by the wrath of princes, when he has innocently
drawn it upon himself: for he is Christ's vassal,
and his allegiance is to God alone."
" Well, mine is to you; and it will not be found
wanting," answered Villepreux. "No one can
harm a hair of your head without stepping over my
dead body, and the bodies of my men. No matter
whither you would go, we have but one word to
speak, and that is out of the Gospel: ' Let us also
go that we may die with him!' But it is hard
for us to see you throw away your life, consciously,
in order to " —
" Ah! if but my life could do it! " murmured
Dom John, bringing his hands together, with flush-
ing cheeks, and with radiant eyes uplifted. ,
<pb>
The heartfelt, almost involuntary exclamation
cut short Villepreux's monologue. "'How one
loses one's labor,' " he quoted murmuringly, "ar-
guing with these saints! Guy, I surrender."
And sinking on one knee on the damp rock, he
added gravely: "Since it pleases you to die for
your enemies, at least bless your friends!"
Their interviews often ended in this manner.
The Prior stretched his hand over the proud head
which inclined gladly before him.
At this moment, Lo'ic entered the grotto, whis-
pering: "Come, Father, I pray you. The sick
man has awakened, and Father Andrew needs you."
Walter's slumber was ended. He had begun to
question his nurses, with an air of harsh distrust
which soon exhausted the patience, none too am-
ple at any time, of Brother Louis. Even Dom
Andrew replied to him with that deliberate quiet
which shows that its self-control is a matter of
effort.
" Once more, my dear son, I assure you that you
are in a place of safety, and not in a dungeon, and
that we are not your jailers, but your physicians.
Do you wish me to taste this drink for you? It is
no poison, but a very salutary remedy. Take it,
I implore you, if you would be cured."
An angry gesture from Maulny overturned the
goblet, the contents of which spurted over the
friar's robe. " I wish nothing of you or yours,
traitor monk! You have sold yourself to Fouge-
reuse!"
<pb>
Father Andrew sighed, as Dora John came in,
followed by Lo'ic and Villepreux. At sight of the
three, the wounded refugee shrank hack instinc-
tively, and the spark of rancor flamed up in his
eyes. The Prior softly approached the bed. "Are
you suffering less, my brother? " he inquired, with
gentlest solicitude.
"What matter whether I do, or do not?" an-
swered Walter harshly. "Let me die in peace."
. "We hope to heal you, and save you, God
willing!"
"It would be better to finish me at once. The
King is bound to have me killed, nor will Tris-
tram miss me the second time."
"You are here in inviolable sanctuary. Our
Lady of Pity is a rampart which Tristram will not
scale. Confide in our hospitality, and in the pro-
tection of the Mother of God."
"I confide in you?" exclaimed Maulny, with
difficulty raising himself a little. "I confide in
you, Guy de Fougereuse? You are too ready to
think me your dupe, for I should rather confide in
Satan. Drop this mask of holiness! You know
that you hate me, in the bottom of your heart."
"I never hated you, Walter. Never: I repeat
the word. Let us bury the past. All I desire of
you is the salvation of your soul. Will you refuse
me that?"
"Ha!"said Walter, with a cold, bitter laugh,
" I expected this ! You would have me make my
confession to you; you would see me at your feet,
<pb>
striking my breast, and crying for mercy. Why
do you not require me to don the habit and swear
obedience ? Would it not be a pretty revenge ?
But you may as well seek other penitents, my man
of God. You will never make over a Maulny into
a trophy of your prowess ! "
"Miscreant and ingrate ! " Villepreux shouted,
unable to contain himself longer. " Do you for-
get to whom you speak? To one mortally injured
in his good name because of you: to the betrayed
knight, the persecuted religious. He stands here
beside you, willing to forget his wrongs, that he
may succor you; and you, the guilty person, you,
the oppressor, you, rescued by his heroic charity,
you repay him but with suspicion and insult!
Is there yet in you the soul of a gentleman,
Maulny, or have you traded it into the Devil's
hands?"
" He has his attacks of eloquence, the gallant
Lion ! " said Walter. Then, turning toward the
Prior: "Tell me, forsooth, my beloved cousin,
what spell you cast upon these simple folk, to
make them believe so in your virtue !" he
sneered.
"Job himself could never have endured this
creature! " mumbled Brother Louis, in his indig-
nation.
Guy gazed sadly upon his reviler. To so much
sharp and insolent speech, he opposed but a word
or two, in a low voice :
" Walter, what did I ever do to you ? "
<pb>
The countenance of the ambitious, fallen cour-
tier changed, and a frightful expression of frenzy
swept over it. " What did you do to me ? Do
you ask me what you have done ? You have made
me what I am ! May you be cursed for it! "
He seized with his fingers, which were burning
hot with fever, the wristband of Dom John, thus
forcing the monk to bend down towards him.
" What did you do to me ? You stole my share
of life ! You profited by my ill-luck, to secure
fortune find happiness. You refused me the hand
of your sister, only to bestow it on the enemy of
your house. You wrought my disgrace and ban-
ishment. Royal favor, inheritance, reputation: you
took them all from me, you robbed me of them
all! And what am I now? A man under the
sentence of death, tracked like a wild deer. And
you ! You are living in peace; you are the con-
tented and honored leader of friars who serve you,
as it were, on their knees, and of imbecile vassals
who worship the ground under your feet! And
you ask me what you did to me ? Hangman!
Give me back what you wrested from me! "
" Walter ! " cried the Prior, grasping both hands
of the fugitive, " Walter, listen to me. I implore
you"-
" You come, talking to me of salvation!" the
other continued, in ever-increasing fury. " You
come, burdening me with your generosities ! These
spectators compliment me as ingrate and miscreant,
and will bury me under your 'heroic charity.'
<pb>
Drop the mask, I say, hypocrite comedian! and
let your own face be seen."
" You see it now," answered Dom John, inclin-
ing his head, with resigned sweetness : " it is the
face of a friend."
" Of the friend Judas ! " Maulny interrupted,
scornful, implacable. lie tore his hands from the
Prior's hold, and with savage suddenness struck
at him so violently that the latter staggered, from
the blow, half across the room. " Away, impostor!
I will not be seduced."
At this brutal attack, plainly the act of a mad-
man, both Villepreux and Lo'io started forward: one
terrible in his passionate wrath, the other trem-
bling with indignation and grief. Dom Andrew
impeded Robert, while the novice threw himself on
the floor at his superior's knees, kissing his hands
and his garment:, and looking up at him with that
intense affection which had been proven again and
again.
Dom John appeared to be conscious of nothing.
He took a slow step backward, with his eyes fixed
on the Crucifix which hung above the bed, and on
those merciful, outstretched arms. Then he joined
his hands, and finally murmured: "Our Lady of
Pity, blessed Mother! Suffer not thine unhappy
child to perish thus."
"Father," said Dom Andrew, "I entreat you
not to remain here with us. You see that the man
is delirious. Spare your sons further heartaches ;
and go, instead, to pray to Our Lord. You will
<pb>
be heard by Him, if not by this poor hardened
soul."
" Can you assure me that he will not die to-
night ? " The Prior spoke as he reluctantly turned
away.
" I think I can do so. He may live several
days. Be pleased, Father, to withdraw at once ;
and you shall be called, if he should give any sign
or token of repentance. "
Dom John acquiesced. Villepreux followed
him from the crypt, clenching his fists, and master-
ing his feelings as he could. The Society of the
Penitent Thief, drawn up in array, awaited its
chief in the quadrangle. Robert signalled for his
horse ; and when he was in the saddle, he growled,
casting his fiery glance all around him:
" Good Lord! what a shame it is to risk the
lives of such brave soldiers and such godly monks,
all for love of that devil-possessed creature!"
Then, in a loud, stern voice, he gave the order of
departure. The troops clattered away, and the
captain reserved to himself alone the duty of
marking the outposts, and of placing sentinels
along the borders of the valley.
Meanwhile, Dom John implored the mercy of
Our Saviour for Walter de Maulny. Striking his
breast, he repeated the words of David: " 'From
my secret sins cleanse me, 0 Lord, and from those
of others spare thy servant.' And forgive me
those which my brethren have committed through
me." There he remained all night, at the feet of
<pb>
Our Lady, and there Lo'ic found him before the
morrow's dawn. When he arose, his face had
regained its habitual serenity. He led the chant-
ing of the Office with perfect attentiveness, but
ever and anon he would cast upon the floor a
gaze so intent that it seemed to pierce the marble
tiles. As soon as Father Andrew, after having
completed his long vigil at the crypt bedside, was
seen ascending the choir steps, Dom John started,
and turned inquiringly towards the venerable fig-
ure. Despite the sacredness of the place, and the
antiphonal Psalms already begun, Dom Andrew
drew near, and whispered in the Prior's ear. And
when Matins were over, the latter raised his voice:
" A certain soul in danger is fighting against its
own salvation. Let us do violence to the Kingdom
of Heaven, O my brothers and my sons!" He
was the first to kneel and intone the Miserere, to
which the community answered from their stalls;
then, standing up, and beckoning to Father
Andrew to follow him, he glided rapidly from the
church.
" Is there no hope for him ? " he asked the her-
mit earnestly, as they crossed the inner court of
the cloister.
" I did not say quite that, Father; but the situa-
tion is more grave, and death is hanging over him
by a hair. He has gone through a terrible crisis:
while it lasted, I thought, a dozen times, that he
was passing away in my arms. He is calmer now,
but his strength is going. The sword is wearing
<pb>
through the sheath. It is dreadful, dreadful, to
see a Christian soul choosing damnation."
"What! Could you do nothing with him?
Your long spiritual experience, the authority of
age"- "
'• Nothing, Father, nothing. I urged, exhorted,
supplicated, all in vain. I tried to touch his
heart, or to wake his conscience. He refused
stubbornly to repent or to confess, and he broke
silence only to indulge in a fit of passion. The
poor lost soul rejects Divine Grace; he will sue
neither for the mercy of his Redeemer, nor the
forgiveness of his fellow-man. Death may come
at any moment, and send him unprepared into
eternity. God help us! It is an agonizing
thought, Father."
" I will go to Walter," said Dom John, in a low
voice. He stepped forward, but his aged compan-
ion detained him.
" Nay, nay, not you! " he exclaimed, in accents
of such meaning that the Prior stood still. " Not
you, I beg." .
" What can you fear ? Has anything happened ?
Why do you seem so anxious ? . . . Hide naught
from me, my Brother, on your vow of obedience.
I need to know whatever there is to know."
" The sick man cannot endure your presence,
Father," Dom Andrew said gently. "The time
for that has not arrived."
"Does he hate me, then, so much? " the younger
man sighed. " Has it come to this ? "
<pb>
"It is a hard trial for you, my son of former
days ! " answered the old friar, pressing the Prior's
hands between his own. " It is hard, too, for me
to own the truth, but I must be frank with you.
Maulny, indeed, is losing his very soul through
the hatred he bears you : it burns him alive like
an infernal flame. Your name is to him a sting, a
torment, a lasting nightmare. Your kindness only
serves to embitter him ; your generosity hurts and
maddens. He blames you for all his crimes; he
curses the tortures you force him to undergo,
when that charity •which he, alas, cannot under-
stand, heaps coals of fire upon his head. In fine,
if the pardon of God be refused and contemned, it
is simply because Maulny feels that in accepting
it, he must also accept yours (I do not say even
ask yours !) and must thus humble himself before
you. It is a craze of pride, a sort of triumph in
him of the demon of envy. . . I have told you
enough, so pray do not question me further," con-
tinued Dom Andrew imploringly. "Be not sad-
dened or self-reproachful, dear Father; for you
did everything possible to move the unhappy man,
and your zeal ran aground on a nature harder than
the rocks. But God is strong enough to melt it
yet, and has no need of us to help Him in His
work! The thoughts of the Lord are not our
thoughts, and His ways are beyond our ways as the
heavens are exalted above the earth. Let us pray
unceasingly, and never despair."
The melancholy, weary voice of the monk belied
<pb>
his encouraging words. The fact was, that never
in his long career had the ancient champion of the
Faith met with such obstinate impenitence, at the
solemn hour when the breath of the grave is wont
to chill earthly passions. Dom John lifted his
head, sunk upon his breast, as if under the weight
of a burden heavier than he could bear. His eyes
were cast upward, with a look in them of invin-
cible confidence.
"Our Lady of Pity will intercede for her guilty
son, at the throne of his Elder Brother, who is our
God," he said. " And because of that, I hope
against hope. . . . What is it, Brother Louis ? "
Lo'ic had neared them with quick steps, along
that side of the cloister where they stood, and
had come to a standstill a few feet away, waiting,
with evident impatience, until the Superior should
have ended his talk with Dom Andrew. At the
former's invitation, he eagerly approached.
" Reverend Father, a stranger has arrived who
wishes to speak with you at once. He will not
give his name, but he questions everybody, and he
looks at everything. He reminds me of Jacob the
Weasel! Were it not for his more rampant air, I
should have said it might be King Louis in person.
I would not swear "—
" I will receive him," Dom John replied shortly.
"When will you learn a little reserve of speech,
my son?"
" For which I ask your pardon, Father," the
novice humbly replied. Then, encouraged by the
<pb>
indulgent smile which greeted him, he added:
" Will you please permit me to watch over Walter
to-night?"
" Yes: provided Dom Andrew thinks it well to
take you for his assistant. You are not yet per-
fected in patience, my poor child! "
"Well, I am not!" Brother Louis murmured
to himself, as he followed with loving eyes the
Prior's retreating figure; " but I know a saint who
is. That imp of a Maulny must make his confes-
sion to-morrow, or else give some uncommonly
good reason for not doing so!"
In the reception-hall of the monastery, Dom
John found himself confronted by a small man, of
sinister appearance, but of smooth, courteous man-
ners. He was dressed in a plain, brown surcoat,
and a well-worn cap. Fougereuse, despite this
rural simplicity, at once recognized Master Oliver
le Daim, otherwise known as Oliver the Bad, or
Oliver the Devil, the barber and the minister of
King Louis XL, and his most intimate associate.
After having gravely saluted him, his host mo-
tioned him to a high-backed seat, and placed him-
self in his Prior's chair, which was raised one
grade above the floor. Crossing his hands under
his ample sleeves, he waited for Oliver to speak.
The latter had already taken his companion's
measure. For all Dom John's inflexible serenity,
Master le Daim felt that a struggle was at hand,
and that he should have to play a close game.
He began in the ordinary way, and presently
<pb>
sounded the praises of the monastery, of its regu-
larity of life, of its holy Prior and fervent com-
munity; he announced that his Majesty held that
Prior in great esteem, in such very great esteem,
indeed, that now there was a vacant bishopric, he
had thought of him in connection with it. And
why not even a higher honor? The cardinal's
hat, in the opinion of Louis of France, might as
easily be bestowed upon another of his true coun-
sellors as it was upon His Eminence la Ballue!
From time to time, the wary diplomat made an
artfully calculated pause, inviting some response to
his insinuations, and glancing adroitly upward, in
order to detect Dom John's real sentiments. But
he, with downcast eyes, sat silent and immovable,
statue-like.
" The King is your well-wisher, Father Prior,"
was Oliver's concluding word. "He thinks that
he is able to rely upon your fealty."
The monk made a correct and formal bow. " I
am not aware that I have ever given him occasion
to doubt me."
" There was a time when his Majesty was preju-
diced against you." Oliver dropped into a con-
fidential tone. " But your accuser, by his own
felonious conduct, established the untruth of his
statements." And he repeated the sum and sub-
stance of Maulny's slander of the Priory; deepening
the tints, already sufficiently black, of his infamous
charges ; expressing wonder that one relative could
nourish such spite against another, and unfolding,
<pb>
one by one, the new instances of Maulny's mean
manoevres
Dom John listened without stirring an eyelash,
in a marble caiin. "I knew all this," he said
quietly, as soon as Oliver had done speaking.
"Whew! Your Reverence must have a good
detective service," he had to exclaim, feeling some-
what disconcerted.
For the first time, Fougereuse wore a light smile.
His eyes were on those of the envoy, reading his
thoughts; the astute guest, conscious of it, bit
his lip.
" You are wasting time, friend Oliver. What
would your master with me ? "
Put into a position to explain himself, le Daim
hesitated. His way was not a straight way, and
his tortuous policy found itself crossed by this
direct attack.
" His Majesty knows, beyond any doubt," he
replied slowly, lowering his voice, "that Walter
de Maulny, pursued by men who had the royal
commission, sought refuge here, and that you
granted it to him."
" Well, my son ? " the monk said, with the tran-
quillity which comes from a quiet conscience.
The barber decided to burn his ships behind
him, and take the aggressive attitude, thus : "Well,
my lord Prior, the King reclaims Walter de
Maulny! I summon you to deliver him at once
into my hands. I have orders to carry him to
Loches."
.
<pb>
It was now Dom. John's turn to look at Oliver
with astonishment. "I do not understand you,
Master le Daim."
" The King will have Walter, dead or alive," re-
peated the comrade of Louis XL, " dead or alive,
if you understand that! I fear you are trying to
fool me, Dom John de Fougereuse."
" Not at all, Master Oliver the Bad; but you
took me by surprise. For I gave asylum to a vic-
tim caught in ambush, and escaping from his assas-
sins, and I cannot conceive your purport. Walter
is not my prisoner, nor is he the hostage of the
King. He came freely to sanctuary, and when he
leaves it, it shall be as freely."
"Are you ignorant that he has committed the
crime of high treason, that he was in the pay of
Francis of Brittany ? His very presence is a mortal
menace to your convent and to yourself. You never
had a worse enemy than this man. I wish to be
hanged, if I can guess why you should befriend
him ! What can you expect from him ? He is lost,
he is ruined, beyond redemption."
" He is here, relying on a sacred traditional
right," said the Prior, rising to his feet. " I have
no need to know more. What to me are your in-
trigues, or his disgrace and ruin ? I am the guar-
dian of the honor of this church: I will maintain
it against the whole world. The sanctuary of Our
Lady of Pity shall not be profaned by blood-thirsty
villains, so long as one friar remains here to defend
its threshold."
<pb>
"Is this your answer, Father Prior? Are you
forgetting the allegiance you owe your sove-
reign?"
The Benedictine stretched his hand out towards
a statue of Our Lady with her Divine Babe, which
dominated the vast room. " There is my sove-
reign, and King Louis' sovereign also. I am ready
to die in her service."
Oliver crossed himself devoutly, while inwardly
he consigned the obstinate monk to the powers of
evil. " Pray reconsider, your Reverence. I would
not have you subject to severe measures. Yet the
King might employ armed force! What else could
you do then, save surrender?"
" What could I do ? I could resist: not indeed
by a rebellion, but by the spiritual authority in-
trusted to me. I could pronounce publicly the ipso
facto excommunication incurred by any who pro-
fane the holy place. It is for the King to choose
whether he will expose himself to it."
" Excommunicate his Majesty !" cried le Daim,
bewildered by the threat. " Do you mean it, Father
Prior ? The scandal of it would overturn the king-
dom of France!"
" In any case, the blame will not be mine. My
conscience will be at rest."
" You have not spoken your final word," Oliver
continued, visibly agitated. " Do not try to impose
upon me. See now: what price do you ask for'
giving Maulny into our hands ? I repeat that
a bishopric, nay, a cardinalate, has entered his
-
<pb>
Majesty's mind as a suitable reward for you. And
unless you aspire to the Papal tiara " —
" You alarm me, my son. I must write to King
Louis at once, and relieve you of all responsibility
in the matter."
Dom John seated himself at a table covered with
parchments, and seizing a pen, wrote rapidly, dur-
ing several minutes. " Read ! " he said, offering
the letter to Oliver le Daim.
The latter cast his eyes over it, and shrank back
in dismay. " I shall never deliver such a message,
Fougereuse."
" As you please. Give it to me : I will seal and
send it. Where is his Majesty at present? "
" At Angers castle."
" I thank you."
The barber-minister silently watched the Prior
fold the manuscript, and stamp it with the great
seal of the monastery, then summon a lay Brother,
and hand it to him, with directions spoken in
an undertone. A few moments later, the clatter of
hoofs resounded on the gravel.
" You may go now, Oliver. My missive will be
at Angers before you."
" What a man you are !" exclaimed le Daim, gaz-
ing at Dom John with a sort of admiration. " Are
you aware that all this may end very, very badly ?
Only a year ago, the Prior of Saint Mark's was
thrown into the Loire, by Tristram's orders, for
an act less bold than yours."
" It matters little, my son. One must die some-
<pb>
time! Either by land or water, Paradise is ac-
cessible. Perhaps I am even more ambitious than
you deem me, Master Oliver! You offer me the
red hat: but I seek the martyr's crown."
Night had come again: one of those lovely,
calm, starlit nights which belong to the sweet
sky of Anjou. The friars had sung Compline,
and were filing through the cloisters, with bowed
heads and folded hands, in that absolute silence
which monastic rule imposes upon the recollected
evening hours. Those who lay ill at the hospice
saw the Brother in charge arrive at his post of
duty, and light the lamp which burned before the
statue of Our Lady. That gracious figure, in the
ray of the steadfast, mystical flame, was a conso-
lation to sleepless eyes. The sufferers felt them-
selves supported and strengthened by Mary's
maternal hand, by her whom the Church calls
health of the sick, refuge of sinners, comforter of
the afflicted; and if they suffered on, it was not
without hope and peace and resignation. *
Villepreux's Thieves, leaning on their spears,
kept watch along the walls; and across the whole
width of the valley, the picket posts of the gallant
little arm}- stood ready to utter the cry of alarm,
at the first scent of danger. Their captain re-
mained at the Priory, and his sharp eyes senti-
nelled the sentinels as effectively as they would
detect the approach of the enemy. Villepreux
<pb>
had employed every precaution which human pru-
dence and devoted fidelity could suggest, and left
the rest to Heaven. There could be no such thing
now as taking the Priory at a disadvantage, were
Louis XI. to come with his Scotch soldiers, or
Satan with all his swarm! One leader would
find before him a troop ready for battle; and the
other would surely encounter the legions of angels
which Heaven places at the disposal of its Queen,
and who have her name as their war-cry, to strike
terror through the hosts of Hell.
In the shadowy crypt, Walter de Maulny tossed
on his bed of pain. Near him was Father Andrew,
attentive to his lightest wish, humoring him in his
worst caprices; though nothing seemed to satisfy
or quiet him. Isabelle de Villepreux had made a
great effort to lead him into more Christian moods.
She had visited him during the day, holding her
little daughter by the hand; she had leaned over
the wounded wretch with sisterly solicitude; she
spoke to him of their childish years passed to-
gether, and then, believing him touched by her
sweet words, she importuned him to return to
God. Walter turned away harshly from the gen-
tle young dame and her angel-like compassion ;
he shut his eyes that he might not be affected
by the innocent beauty of Yvette, who was the
very picture of her mother at the same age; he
shut his heart, too, to all memories of the old
time, as if by so doing he revenged himself for his
unrequited suit. She, therefore, departed in tears,
<pb>
without having won any response save this bitter
reproach: "You could have saved me once, Isa-
belle, but you would not. And now it is too late."
Afterwards, however, the vision of those wet
blue eyes came back to haunt him in his solitude,
and to add to his anguish. Nor could he escape
from it. Through his troubled brain rushed a
thousand remembrances of his earliest youth, of
the days when as yet the passion of envy had
not dried up the lifesprings of his heart. He saw
again his mother's kinsman, the baron Amaury de
Fougereuse, who reared him as his son, and taught
him to be truthful and brave; he saw the comely
baroness, his second mother, who devoted to him
the same care and the same endearments which
she bestowed upon her own children; he saw
Isabelle, no older than the wee Yvette, laughing,
and with golden ringlets, her little hand in that
of the boy who was then her champion and slave.
He saw also (and this hurt him most), a Guy whom
he had not learned to hate, who walked arm-in-
arm with him, shared his sports, knelt beside him
at morning and evening prayer: a Guy who ever
turned upon Walter the eyes of brotherly love.
The unhappy culprit would fain flee away from
these phantoms which enraged him so; or again,
he would cry out upon his own bodily weakness,
which forced him to look upon them without
anger. He talked much and impiously; he loaded
with abuse and profanity the kindly friars at his
bedside. Dom Andrew vexed himself but little
<pb>
on that account. He knew, by experience, that
such mad outbursts indicated the remorse stirring'
within, and he prayed God to perfect His work,
and send the grace of repentance.
Midnight rang from the belfry. The door
opened, and Brother Louis came softly into the
room. Bending over the aged monk, he asked
a question or two; the latter rose, observed his
patient, who had apparently just fallen asleep,
gave some brief instructions to the novice, and
noiselessly withdrew. Lo'ic sank into the seat va-
cated by the hermit, and fervently raised his mind
to God in prayer. The war over Maulny's soul
was to rage that night between Brother Louis and
the Prince of Darkness, and the youth had sworn,
by the help of Heaven, to make him relinquish
his prey. Maulny remained in the same state of
drowsiness real or feigned, his hard features laying
by nothing of their fierceness and cynicism. Ever
and anon Lo'ic rose, and brooded over the rebel
against God and man. Instinctively his lips, obey-
ing his thought rather than his will, began to
murmur that beautiful prayer of the great Saint
Thomas Aquinas: " Supreme Goodness, 0 Lord
Jesus! create in me a heart captivated by Thee,
which no sight or sound of this world may distract
from Thee : a proud and faithful heart, which never
wavers, never descends."
Maulny's eyelids fluttered nervously, though
they remained closed. Brother Louis went on:
" A free heart, never seduced, never enslaved: an
<pb>
upright heart, never found in devious ways: a
dauntless heart, that will renew itself after every
storm."
" Hold there ! " cried the patient, throwing him-
self forward in the bed. " Are your prayers canon-
ical, my reverend friend ? In any event, they are
ambitious. You tempt the Lord." He repeated
ironically : " A proud heart, a heart faithful and
upright, and free, and dauntless, and what else?
Plague upon it! but that is enough. Do you
think you are everything that is good?"
"A truce to your sneers, messire Walter! " Lo'ic
answered. "They do but harm you, and delight
the evil spirits. It is time to dress your wounds.
Let me examine them."
" Ah! the old patriarch has given me up. By
Saint George ! I am not sorry for it, for that long
face of his gave me the nightmare. And you:
who are you? Something in your voice sets me
against you. I have heard it in my dreams, like
a carillon that mocked me. Come hither, hobgob-
lin, that I may see you plain."
He seized the novice by the hand, and drew him
to his side, curious to discover whether, in that
tranquillized face, he could detect any souvenir
of the past. Loi'c endured the scrutiny without
winking. But at last Maulny shoved him away,
and turned over on his pillow. " Those are Ker-
nis's eyes! I believe I am going mad." Then,
with sudden fury, he added: " That were all that
is lacking to my death-agony! Every one of them
<pb>
come to me here! Why not King Ren6 ? As for
Louis of France, we are two at the same game :
against a deceiver, pit a deceiver and a half!"
And he broke out into wicked laughter.
Lo'ic prepared the bandages in silence. Wal-
ter looked at him, and continued disdainfully:
"Come, pretty page! stop masquerading. I tell
you I know who you are. Do you hear me, Louis-
Artus III., count of Kernis?"
" I cannot imagine, messire, to whom you think
you are speaking. There is no count of Kernis.
My name is Brother Louis."
" Make some one else believe that! You played
successfully the part of a Breton shepherd, but —
a friar? You have fine impudence, on my soul!
Confess your mischievous prank. I will laugh
Avith you, and it will soothe me."
" Maulny, I am no friar, but a poor novice, whom
his superiors are not yet willing to admit to vows,
much as he importunes them. I ought not to
answer to the name which was mine when I was
a layman. Novices or professed religious, we
monks are dead to the world: and that is some-
thing which worldlings are determined never to
understand! Now then: be quiet, and let me
bathe your wounds. That is my purpose in being
here."
Walter offered no resistance to the skilful, sup-
ple-fingered hands, once so deft with the rapier,
which now enabled Brother Louis to be the best
infirmarian in the adjoining hospice. The young
<pb>
man's dexterity, evidently the result of consider-
able experience, seamed to shake Maulny's dis-
belief in him, and it was in a much more serious
tone that he next addressed Lo'ic: " Do you mean
to say that you followed your master hither? "
" I did, indeed, come hither for love of my
earthly master; but it is for love of the Heavenly
Master that I stay. And here I hope to die, loyal
to them both."
Walter turned his head, with a sudden, impa-
tient movement, which caused the strip of linen to
fall from his companion's hand. " Horrors! can
it be true ? The finest piece of mesmerism Fouge-
reuse ever wrought! How could he have had the
heart to change Lo'ic into a friar! . . . What a
pity! You thought yourself a hero, my lad, and
in reality you were just a simpleton. Better have
buried yourself alive! for it would sooner be over."
" My thanks for your .advice !" the novice re-
plied, without irritation. " Would you but remain
quiet, sir knight, instead of bestirring yourself, in-
every sense of the word, there might be some
chance of fastening these bandages."
The nurse had regained his authority over the
patient, who mechanically allowed himself to be
tended, while he watched every motion Brother
Louis made. The sight of the young Benedictine
bred wonder, mingled with compassion. Was this
really that same child, full of nerve and pluck, in
love with liberty, dreaming only of battles to be,
and of great blows to strike ? the bold, mischiev-
<pb>
ous stripling, whose vein of humor came to the
fore, even in the hour of danger? the Lo'ic who
had defied all the peers at his friend's famous trial ?
" Is this the most that Fougereuse could make
of you?" The wounded man spoke slowly, cast-
ing a rueful glance on the busy, bent head. " To
condemn you to this, you so young, so comely,
so nobly born, after all your sacrifices for him!
Poor boy, why did you not attach yourself to me ?
for I would have repaid your devotion in a far
different manner. Trust me never to have buried,
under a monk's habit, the blood of Nome'noe! But
you are free as yet, Kernis, are you not?"
" Good Lord, good Lord! " exclaimed the other,
rising up, and stepping back, with one of his old
characteristic gestures. Then he stopped short,
and stood for a moment near the bed, silent and
motionless. The hanging lamp lit up the brow of
one-and-twenty, radiant with youth and purity,
already marked austerely with the tonsure; the
eyes which still were full of fire, but of fire hal-
lowed and subdued; the face so lofty and yet so
meek, whose every feature bespoke a spirit freed
from human yoke, and subject to God alone. Be-
fore .the victorious look of him whom he was com-
miserating, Maulny's own forehead reddened.
" Good Lord!" the novice said, more gently,
" what patience one does need when dealing with
you, Walter de Maulny! Father Prior accuses
me of lacking it, but I have just swallowed
enough to last me. What demon prompts you to
<pb>
this miserable course ? Listen, once for all, and
set your mind at rest. The blood of Nome'noe had
to choose either the throne or the cloister! Envy
me, or imitate me, but do not wrong me by offering
me your pity. It is more glorious to serve Christ
Our Lord than to govern a kingdom. Six feet of
earth and a shroud: there is man's utmost in this
world! Or were it otherwise, I would not, for an
empire, exchange my better part. If you knew
with what excelling joy and peace God rewards
his own ! . . . There! be not angry. The wounds
are dressed. Let me cover you again."
" Talk not to me of joy or peace, or anything of
the sort! " replied Walter excitedly, " nor of hell,
nor of death; or may the Devil take you! I will
not be preached at! "
" Very well. Have your own way."
All was still for a quarter of an hour, until, the
stillness weighing upon the sick man, lie began to
complain bitterly. "I am thirsty: give me some-
thing to drink. No, not that cup; I must have
the other. . . . How can you be willing to see
me suffer so ? You do nothing to help me. . . .
I am choking."
" Lean on me. I am going to lift you. Would
you like to have me change the pillows?"
" No . . . yes ... as you will. But I should
rather have you drive away these ghosts. I can-
not shut my eyes, without feeling them all around
me. . . . Drive them away! Talk, shout, sing!
Keep me from thinking ! "
..
<pb>
He was in evident anguish. Lo'ic was touched;
and while he did what he could to relieve Maulny,
he began to sing, in a soft clear tenor, an ancient
hymn to Our Lady, which ere now had given
comfort and pleasure to the fever-stricken under
his care. But at its opening measures, Walter
sprang up with an oath.
"Blood and thunder, Kernis! Who taught you
that? ... I will not have it. ... Be quiet, or
I" —
" What is the matter? What have I done ? "
" Be quiet! Your voice is like /«'«, when . . .
long ago, we two together . . . sang it at our
evening prayers. . . . Curses on him! ... I
never can pray any more. ... I curse you for
this life and the next, Guy de Fougereuse ! "
" God forgive you, Maulny! " Lo'ic said sol-
emnly. " You do not know what you are saying."
"I do riot, eh?" exclaimed Maulny, shrugging
his shoulders. "Own it, young knave! own it:
Guy ordered you to sing that, and so work upon
my feelings. It was our childish lullaby. A
little more, and I should have stumbled into the
trap! But I am nobody's dupe, my dear novice."
" I should not wish you to be duped. But you
are an ingrate, hostile to those who love you."
" Those who love me! " the wounded knight
broke in, with an incredulous laugh. " This child
is unique for imagining things. Those who love
me! Who are they, I beg you to inform me?
Who ever loved me ? You, perhaps ? Ha, ha!"
<pb>
" I was not thinking of myself, who am nothing
to you, but of nobler hearts which you have
broken. Smile not thus, Maulny! Yesterday I
saw Isabelle de Villepreux teaching her little ones
to pray for you."
A passing regret came over Walter's face; but
it flitted away. " Isabelle, poor soul! Why did
she come here? I have no grudge against her, for
Guy did it all."
" Do not mention his name again, you who
never really knew him ! "
" Did I never really know Guy de Fougereuse ?
The charge is amusing: I only wish it were true!
Far better for me never to have been born, than to
have known that man at all. And I never really
knew him ? Have you come here to say that to
me? Repeat it, if you dare!"
The speaker's eyes were ablaze. Brother Louis
did not reply immediately. Bending over, by the
light of the lamp on the table, he counted out the
drops of the elixir which fell, one by one, from a
phial he was holding, into a cup half-full of water.
Neither he nor Maulny heard the door open, or
saw some one enter with infinite caution, and
glide forward, to stand in the shadows, at the
head of the bed. The nurse, having finished his
task, laid the liquid down, and stood upright,
crossing his arms.
" Listen, Walter de Maulny. I have a right to
judge Dom John: I who am a witness of his daily
life for over a dozen years. No: you never
<pb>
really knew him! Your hate belongs to a phan-
tom which you yourself created in his stead, and
called by his name; which you always envied and
detested. But he, my master and my Father " —
" That is where you deceive yourself, child,"
said Maulny, raising himself again. " No one
loved Guy better than I did ! Do not protest: for
it is true. It was in our boyish days. Everybody
loved him. If he were in the room, it was useless
for another to try to win attention even from a
servant, yea, even from a dog! Ah, there was a
time when I was led captive, like the rest. Had
he willed it, I would have given him the devoted
affection of all my heart. With one little word of
tenderness, he could have gained me for his friend,
and saved me from evil; but he would not take
the trouble. He made sport of me, scorned me,
defeated me, by preference. Rivals in every field
as we were, I had to love or hate him unreser-
vedly. He chose " —
Maulny paused. He stared into the dark with a
frightful intensity, as if his last words had had
power to call up a spectre. " He chose my hatred.
Let him keep it for ever and ever!"
The bed-curtain shook slightly, and a deep sigh
came faintly to Lo'ic's ear. He made the sign of
the Cross, as he looked around. " Unhappy one!"
he said, approaching the sick man, " have you for-
gotten that it was Dom John who saved you from
Tristram's daggers ? "
" Oh, he saved me, I know; he affects the mag-
<pb>
nanimous. But he must answer for me, all the
same, at the Judgment Day. I pawned my soul
only that I might get the better of him. . . . Even
now, in the very jaws of death, I would sell my
salvation to carry out my revenge! to see that
imperious Fougereuse humbled, in his turn, as low
as I am, and spurned as he spurns me. ... I
am more hungry for that retaliation than I am for
Paradise! And now I am losing it. It is all
Guy's work. Well may he sing a psean of victory !
. . . Behold what he has made of me I A worm
would not take the gift of such a life as I lead,
and I die like a reprobate, a reprobate I"
" Oh, let me call Father Andrew! " the novice
pleaded. He took a step towards the threshold,
but Maulny reached out passionately, and held him
fast.
"No, no: I do not wish it. ... I will not, I
tell you! Do not bring back that gray hermit.
No priest can absolve me . . . for I must repent,
and I will not repent. I regret nothing. . . . Guy
has left for me not even the mercy of God in my
last hours!"
" He ! Why, benighted being that you are, he
is invoking that mercy for you, on his knees! You
once saw him stand unflinching in sight of disgrace
and a shameful public death; but now we of this
monastery see him crushed, trembling, unrecogniz-
able, because he feels that your immortal soul is in
peril! He has ceased to eat or sleep; he lays on
himself the hardest penitential exercises; he passes
<pb>
whole nights in.prayers and tears; he is under-
going martyrdom, if only God will snatch you from
ruin! I swear to you, Maulny" —
"Enough! I believe you not. . . . Enough of
your sermons, votary of Saint Fougereuse! "
The sarcasm, so uttered, stung Lo'ic to the quick.
Under his Benedictine dress there began to beat
furiously, as of old, the heart of the noble page who
loved his master alone, and would sacrifice his life
for him. Louis de Kernis faced the elder man just
as he had faced him in King Rene's tribunal,
with a look that seared, with an annihilating
gesture.
" Silence, blasphemer! He whom you thus re-
vile may yet perish because of you. It is for you
that he is braving King Louis' demand. To-mor-
row his head may fall under the executioner's axe;
and to-night your soul may fall into hell! . . . I
have spoken the truth. If I have done wrong in
speaking at all, may Saint Benedict overlook it in
me!"
Walter became absolutely livid, and seized Lo'ic
again, with all his strength. " If you are in ear-
nest, explain things, Kernis," he said harshly, while
his eyes searched the young face before him. But
Brother Louis turned his head aside, inwardly rec-
ognizing and deploring the revolt of his own nature,
and the freshet of angered feeling which had over-
swept the warnings given by the Prior. "Do not
ask me. I have said too much already."
" I must know what you are concealing from
<pb>
me! ... Come, no hypocrisy. . . . What was
that about the King ? . . . Tristram has found me
out!"
"No, Walter: not Tristram."
"Oliver, the King's other crony? . . . You
answer not. . . . Ah, hell-cat of a barber! He
has scented my track, and loosed his blood-hounds
. . . but they will never get me alive. . . . And
your Prior abandoned me to him ; he " —
" Have no fear, messire. Rather did he abandon
himself! Oliver departed, amazed and in great
wrath, haranguing us, at the doors, not to uphold
our fanatic Superior in his rebellion, unless we
meant to make acquaintance with the iron cages
at Loches and Plessis-les-Tours, and reminding us
that the Loire flowed for the benefit of everybody,
and especially of meddling monks! That evening,
Dom John offered to send to the Abbey of Saint-
Aubin any among us who were not willing to suf-
fer persecution for the Church; and he announced
to us his firm resolve to maintain the right of sanc-
tuary, even if he must seal his testimony with his
life-blood. To be sure, no one was disposed to de-
sert him: we would all joyfully follow him to prison
or the grave. Our sole cause of alarm is lest he
should brave them without us! ... Villepreux
and his Saracens have charge of you; they are
bound to defend a client of Our Lady of Pity. Do
you sleep and take your rest, Sir Walter de Maulny.
For your life is secure, and your revenge is very
near. But if you fear God, turn your attention to
<pb>
the state of your soul. No man can save that for
you, nor spend it, either."
" You have said enough to me," replied Walter,
with ever-growing agitation. " Give me my
clothing."
" Your clothing! when you have no strength to
stand! Maulny! are you determined to kill your-
self ? " He struggled to keep his companion in the
bed, and barely succeeded.
Walter wrestled with him, and tried to break out
of the room. " I wish to go from here, to go at
once, whether it kills me or not! Do you under-
stand?"
" I understand that you are raving."
" Dare not to repeat that! " shrieked Maulny, in
a terrible fit of temper. " It was when I asked
sanctuary of your Prior that I was indeed raving !
I ought to have known that Fougereuse would
not let pass so fine an occasion for playing the
hero! . . . Ah, he would die for me, would he ?
Why ? By what warrant? Does he actually think
me so mean, so stupid, that I could let him replace
me on the scaffold ? For what species of coward
does he take me ? ... I will not allow it. If the
King be set upon finishing his work, well and good:
let him finish it! I will not quarrel with him over
the miserable fragment of life I yet possess. Let
him stab me, behead me, or drown me: it is his
right, and I indorse it. See now, you must not
hold me back ! You do not know Louis of France.
My very presence here means death to Guy. Hold
<pb>
me not back, unless you hate me. . . . Help me,
help me! . . . Ah, my cursed weakness ! I can-
not ... do more."
Maulny fell back exhausted, wringing his hands,
weeping with helpless rage. Lo'ic bathed his brows,
covered with sweat. In a cracked voice, the
wounded knight went on : "Anything . . . rather
than this. Put an end to me, and I will thank you
for it. No ? Then call Oliver. Throw me out-of-
doors. . . . The headsman would be so welcome!"
" But what demon has got into you ?" Loi'c
exclaimed, at his wits' end. "Angels and saints
defend us ! The creature has gone mad."
"Ah, there is no pity in you!" Distraught
with grief and passion, Maulny suddenly seized,
with both hands, the bandages which covered his
breast, and tore them off. Brother Louis threw
himself forward, with a cry, to interrupt the pa-
tient's action: but a strong touch came between.
A form arose in the shadowy chamber, and there
in the lamplight gleamed a face of mortal pallor:
the face of Dom John de Fougereuse.
Leaning close over the bed, he gathered up and
mastered its occupant, more by his look than by
his embrace, and breathed into him his own great
and quiet force. Walter fought awhile, and vio-
lently twisted the monk's wristbands, in the vain
hope of loosening his hold. Then he sighed, his
features relaxed, his head fell back, he lost con-
sciousness ; and the blood gushed freely from his
re-opened wound. They made haste to put him
<pb>
out of danger, not a word being interchanged be-
tween the Prior and the novice. From long asso-
ciation, they were accustomed to understand each
oiher,without speech; and the selfsame anxiety now
set their hearts beating in unison. Walter seemed
perfectly lifeless. The Prior raised him gently ;
Lo'i'c took prompt measures to staunch the flow of
blood, and to renew and carefully fasten the ban-
dages. A generous quantity of cordial was poured,
drop by drop, between the discolored lips, where
respiration had apparently ceased. A strange, still
battle, of some hours' duration, then ensued, where
the dying Maulny's rescuers disputed him, inch by
inch, with the death which he had invited: an in-
terval of labor, and prayer, and heartbreak, which
men who love not God cannot believe in nor com-
prehend. But at last they triumphed, and the pa-
tient opened his eyes, surprised to find himself still
in this world. He stared, mutely, at the objects
around: at the low-vaulted crypt, the swaying lamp,
the table, with its flasks of medicine, the dark bed-
curtains, and the ivory crucifix above. Brother
Louis tiptoed to his side, with a glass in his hand.
Walter knew him; his faculties were returning, al-
beit confusedly. But whose arm was it which was
so strong under him ? On whose shoulder was his
weary head lying ? A mother watching over her
sick child could not be more tender than this ser-
viceable stranger! Walter yielded himself to his
new nurse's comforting embrace, with absolute con-
fidence. But his memory awoke with a bound.
<pb>
What if it should be — ? His eyes suddenly met
those of Fougereuse, fixed upon him with such
genuine concern, such poignant sympathy, that,
for the first time, Walter's own hostile spirit was
stricken dumb, and disarmed.
" Guy ? " he stammered, in a voice which was
hardly more than a whisper.
The Prior gently closed his lips. "Hush, im-
prudent one ! Do not try to talk."
Lo'ic proffered the contents of the glass. Maulny
drank obediently, and his torpor began to pass
away. He had seen Dom John, he thought, before
he fainted; now he was sure of it. It was he who
had controlled him so. It was to him that the
failure of his attempt to destroy himself was due.
And yet Maulny's death would mean the safety of
Fougereuse and of his monastery! The patient
turned over, and hid his face. Something was go-
ing on within, as was evident by the contraction
of his hands, and the violent trembling of his whole
body. In the depth of that blighted nature, born
for better things, a spark of honor still glowed;
and the Christian faith of his youth was there too,
to trouble, willingly or unwillingly, his defrauded
conscience.
"Guy!" He made an effort, and called again.
" Guy! " The Prior leaned over, and Walter
raised himself a little. " Have me brought to the
King. I beg and beseech you! He demands my
head: I wish to carry it to him, in person. I tell
you it must be done. Zounds! am I a slave?
Why did you not let me die ? "
<pb>
" You are here to be protected under the Church's
wing, my son. No sacrilegious arm can threaten
you, nay, not even your own, without opposition.
Lie still, and listen to me. The sanctuary of Our
Lady of Pity is the heritage of the unfortunate.
You can sleep in peace under its roof."
"Sleep in peace? Who? I? ... Get me a
litter, and horses ! Take me hence ! . . . Surren-
der me to King Louis. It is your duty as a vassal."
" My son, 1 have a prior duty as a priest. I am
responsible to God for you, nor can I give you up
to another. Spare me this teasing," Dom John
added, in tones which were both plaintive and
severe.
" Guy, but you are injuring yourself, you know I
You are risking your life. No one can foresee
what will happen, if you keep me here." Walter
spoke in short, breathless phrases. "The King
will show you no quarter. I denounced you to
him. And now it all rebounds on me. . . . Dam-
nation ! Why should you save me ? Choose some
other revenge, but not that, not that."
" His mind is wandering ; he is so weak," mur-
mured the Prior. " Why do you name revenge at
all?"
" Because I am talking to you: the man I hated,
whom I ruined, whom I would have sent, remorse-
lessly, to the stake. You remember! "
" I do not remember."
" You do not? How is it, then ? Are you not
Fougereuse ? Are you not the baron Guy ? "
<pb>
" Nay," answered the Benedictine, his eyes, with
their old, far-seeing power, looking down into
Maulny's eyes. " Baron Guy is dead: may the
Lord have mercy upon him! " He made the sign
of the Cross, as if before a grave, and continued
slowly: " Walter de Maulny, that man whom you
say you hated, — the heedless lad who hurt you
with his light speech, the triumphant rival whose
success was your undoing, — he has passed away
from this world. Seek him not here! For six
years past you have been pursuing a ghost. . . .
Do not tremble, my son. The soul which was
Baron Guy is no more, now, than a poor friar dedi-
cated to penance, and praying God, by day and
night, to forgive the sins of his youth. On the
cloister threshold, the passions of this world fade.
In the quiet of a cell, at the foot of a Crucifix,
faults of our former life which men were far from
condemning, faults which they applauded, even,
look to us, at last, as they really were and are in
the sight of the Eternal Wisdom. Then do we
implore Him, with tears, to grant us our purgation
here below, that we may see His face in Paradise."
It was a strange scene, at once thrilling and
simple. In the stone chamber, solemn as a tomb,
under the flickering watch-light, lay the sufferer
on the bed, like the dead awakened from his long
sleep. All the life left in him glowed in his dark
eyes, burning-bright with fever and transient ani-
mation. The Prior, wrapped in his ample black
cowl, the hood thrown back on his shoulders, his
<pb>
shapely head bare, his face bathed in supernatural
peace, his voice peaceful too, but deep and distinct,
seemed some blessed visitor come from above to
comfort the unhappy. In a dim corner, Brother
Louis was on his knees, infinite emotion in his
breast. There, a few steps away, was the drama
of the everlasting fate of a creature of God, being
played between hell and Heaven !
" Blessed be the Merciful Father who brought
you hither, Walter, and gave me the supreme
opportunity of this good hour at your side !" Dora
John resumed. " We have both sinned: against
each other, and against Him. But His joy is to
forgive, as He has proved to me, my brother.
Now, are we two, wrong as'we are, going to hold
aloof, and refuse to pardon the past? I have re-^
proached myself, many a time, for having treated
you with indifference in our boyhood, and even
with hardness. I never knew how our little quar-
rels and competitions weighed on you, Walter, as
you say that they did. You might have pledged
me loyal friendship, and I wantonly forfeited it;
so your hatred began, and grew day by day, until
now it looms between you and your Maker. I am
to blame ; I confess it. I cannot tell you how
odious it seems to me now, to have been as vain,
as frivolous, as obstinate, as I was at twenty! "
" Father ! " Loic whispered the unheard pro-
test.
Maulny flushed the deepest red, and his head
sank lower, despite his will; but he was in no
<pb>
mental condition to answer. The Prior came
nearer, with a frank, outstretched hand, and wist-
ful eyes.
" Walter!"
But Walter hid his face, and panted. " I can-
not ! " He spoke so low that the other could
hardly hear him. " I beg you to ... I cannot."
" Walter, I implore you: my brother of long
ago ! Have I not come to your death-bed to claim
that friendship which, in my folly, I once under-
valued ? to offer you the same hand which once
rejected the grasp of yours ? Be generous to me.
Forgive me; for the sake of, the time and the
place."
Nothing can describe the sincerity of these
words, into which the Prior put his whole soul.
Walter suddenly raised his head from the pillows,
and gazed long at his cousin, too stupefied to
speak.
"Guy! Have I gone mad, or did you ask my
pardon ? Yes? And you, ready to die for me, and
sacrifice your monastery? My hand in yours?
No: it is too deeply stained. Leave me, leave me.
. . . But God will bless you for your deed to-
night, if " —
He never finished his sentence, for Dom John
had taken him in his arms, and gathered him to
his bosom, his fair, clear brow against that brow
branded with shame, and his hands clasping the
hot hands which had wrought for him only per-
secution and disaster.
<pb>
" Blush not before me," said the Prior, with
deep emotion. " I am a priest, my son: I have the
power to absolve you. If you do really and fully
forgive me, let us exchange a kiss of peace, as on
the eve of that blessed day when we received, side
by side, our First Communion: two little lads
under my mother's eyes. You came to me first;
do you recall that, Walter ? Now it is my turn:
I come to you. And the same Lord awaits us
both, in the Sacrament of His Love."
The Prior touched his lips, fraternally, to Maul-
ny's quivering cheek, while the latter, vanquished
at last, shook with great sobs. The monk's humil-
ity had won over that Satanic pride which, con-
fronted with the mere magnanimity of the gallant
gentleman, did but grow fiercer. The hardened
cynic wept like a child, pressed to the tender and
aching heart of the servant of Christ. Brother
Louis rose, and softly uttered an exultant Te
Deum.
" Dear son, your Saviour calls you," said Dom
John, with gentle authority. " You have no cause
for fear. I will take your penance on myself; I
will answer for you ; I would as willingly give my
life for yours, as lie gave His for us both. But
ah, do not refuse Him your soxil, which He pur-
chased with His blood."
" Is it not too late ? " Maulny murmured.
The Prior stood up with lightning in his eyes :
a transformed figure, full of the majesty of his
priesthood. "' Noiv is the acceptable time, now is
•
<pb>
the day of salvation!' Bid not the Lord to de-
lay !" he exclaimed, in commanding accents. " I
speak in His name. Accuse yourself, O Christian
soul!"
It was indeed the day of salvation. A ray of
Divine Grace shot across the darkness, and darted
into the recesses of that tormented spirit. Maulny
bent his head. " Bless me, Father," he began.
From the heart of the religious a hymn of vic-
tory went up to God. Christ had conquered;
hell had lost its trophy ! The angels looked down
upon the two best treasures which their King has
on the earth: the meekness of the just man, and
the sorrow of the sinner.
King Luuis XI. sat in a great dim room of the
castle at Angers. The table near him was covered
with parchments; his elbows rested on the carven
arms of an oaken chair furnished with velvet cush-
ions. He was clad in a surcoat of brown cloth, so
well-worn tiiat any ordinaiy citizen would have
disdained to wear it. On his head was his famous
cap, fringed with leaden medals of the saints, and
circled with a string of rosary beads. His profile,
sufficiently unlovely, but interesting because of
its individual strangeness, had a waxen pallor.
Dressed in the veiy fashion of his master, repro-
ducing his every attitude and expression, as much
as a poor copy can reproduce a painting of value,
Oliver le- Daim stood before the King, dumbly
<pb>
awaiting what blame or praise should be allotted to
the results of his mission.
" And so, comrade," said his Majesty, breaking
in upon his own meditations, " we had a forlorn
chase, and missed our quarry in the end, did we ?
Pasques-Dieu! what is it worth, your nickname
of Oliver the Devil ? I ought to have employed
Tristram instead, with his sub-executioners, and
his fine thick skull: for he never would have done
anything so absurd. You threatened the Prior
with violent measures, and yet you come back with
empty hands! You should either have said nothing
of your intentions, or else put them into immediate
action. I would disclaim you, only that so I should
be playing into the hands of Maulny, and of my
dear cousin of Brittany."
"I did not understand your Majesty's orders in
that sense."
"Stuff! Could the King of France afford to
give such orders? There are certain services
which cannot be prescribed, which a good vassal
knows how to discharge, all the same. Does it be-
hoove me, me, the Eldest Son of the Church, wan-
tonly to overturn the sanctuary privilege, and to
incur the anathema of the Sovereign Pontiff? May
Heaven preserve me from it! But a man like
you, a mere pagan, a moral outlaw, would run no
great risk in getting himself excommunicated!"
"Another time, sire," the barber had begun,
when he was cut short.
" Keep silence, and think of some way to remedy
<pb>
the mischief done. You allowed a letter from the
Prior to reach me: that was the climax of your
hlundering. I should never have received it. Do
you understand me ? Am I Julian the Apostate,
that such language should be addressed to me?
That monk is an adversary not to be despised." He
picked up a folded paper which was lying on the
table, and read slowly, pausing now and then:
"' The Church, sire, is your mother and mine.
When she gathers a fugitive to her breast, his re-
treat is sacred. If the King ask from me what is
my own, I shall not refuse him; but divine things
are not mine to give. Does he wish my patri-
mony ? Let him take it. Or my life? It should
be yielded readily. I would not summon a crowd
of defenders to my side; I prefer to die for the
integrity of our altars.' ... It is all in that
vein," the monarch continued, crushing the letter.
" So much for your foolish behavior! This arro-
gant nobility is everywhere alike in my provinces:
whether under the cowl, or under helmet and
breastplate, it is forever seeking some pretext to
defy my authority. Well, patience! My lady
Democracy will grow like a weed, in the fields of
these haughty dreamers. The common people
will mow the harvest, and, please God, I shall get
the sheaves! And meanwhile, it is better to bend
than to break. Where pride canters before, tears
and trouble gallop after. We have enemies enough
to fight, and rebels enough to tame, without get-
ting into difficulties with Holy Church, whom all
<pb>
Christians should revere and obey." The King
blessed himself piously, mumbling an Our Father ;
then said suddenly: " Robert the Lion: what of
him?"
" One little speech, sire. ' Oliver le Daim, you
were born a knave, and a knave you will die; and
a knave will you be buried, and a knave will
you rise again. Go and perform your antics else-
where I'"
" Really, comrade ? That was not ill-put, for a
giant of his stamp. . . . Setting aside the Prior
and his fast friend, could you make no headway
with the monks? In the cloister, as in other
places, there are discontented and ambitious spirits.
One must make use of these."
" Sire, I tried it. But those men are fanatics.
They aspire to nothing but Heaven, and they fear
nothing but sin. I turned my batteries especially
on one young novice, who seemed to me less con-
firmed in sanctity; for in him I recognized that
wicked little page who used to follow Fougereuse
about, like a pet imp. It was all in vain: he is
worse than the rest, and romantically devoted to
the reverend Father. I am not at all surprised
that that man should once have been considered a
magician, so great is his power over every one who
comes near him."
"Is that so? Did he induce you to go to
confession ? " asked King Louis, with a mocking
smile, and a look which made his favorite minion
shiver. " You have the knack of dealing with
<pb>
scamps, but honest folk do seem somewhat beyond
you! Send the Devil among the saints, as they
say, and you will see him come back disconcerted."
"Indeed, sire," answered the barber, "there are
in your Majesty's policy a number of measures
which can hardly be the business of the saints! "
"You speak truly, friend le Daim," sighed
Louis. " The government of the perverse human
race is a hard and trying task. Politics are a sort
of infernal stew ; often demons, rather than angels,
are needed to stir it and cook it. Behold my rea-
son for employing you, Oliver the Bad, and for
making you a great lord! But in this emergency,
we ought to have here Maulny's wise, level head."
" Sire ! " cried Oliver, astoun'ded.
" Oh, be not startled in the least. I was speak-
ing of his head. As to his body, it may very well
remain where it is."
The King and his confidant exchanged a mean-
ing glance, which bore out their thoughts. Louis
XI. sank again into a revery, pacing up and down
the room. Then he said, coming to a halt before
his minister: " You have lost the first throw; now
I will try the second. I must have that Walter!
The Prior will stipulate for his pardon, and I shall
strike a bargain with him. One can live, yet live
in a dungeon! Have the boats ready. I will go
on a pilgrimage to Our Lady of Pity! "
Some few hours later, the boats were gliding
gently down the stream between the green mea-
dows, grazing the drooping willow-boughs, and
<pb>
swaying the clusters of blossomy reeds which grow
all around the isles of the Loire. They were put
ashore at the foot of a hill having a wooded crest,
where a slender spire, surmounted by a cross, re-
vealed its delicate lace-like stone traceries through
the leafy openings. The bells were ringing their
full chime for the evening Angelus, and in the
fields hard by, one might watch the laborers sus-
pend their tasks, and fold their hands to pray.
Louis XI. disembarked, separated himself from
his escort while passing through the village, and
went alone, as an humble stranger, through the
monastery gate. He rapped at the door of the
hospice, and asked to see Dom John. The King
was shown into a plain, bare room, furnished only
with a large wooden Crucifix, and a couple of
benches. Dom John appeared, very soon, upon
the inner threshold.
" Peace be to you!" he greeted his guest, de-
scending the stone steps which led from the hos-
pice parlor to the Priory.
" My hope is all for peace, Father," responded
the King, rising.
" Your Majesty in this house !" cried the sur-
prised monk.
" I have come to answer your letter otherwise
than in writing: for, Pasques-Dieu! it gave me
a hunger to make your acquaintance. By all the
saints, what apostolic eloquence you spent on me!
Saint John Chrysostom would not have disclaimed
it. And it touched me; I should be most contrite
<pb>
now, had I deserved it. But you, Father, are
quite mistaken. The probable sacrilege, over
which you are so very much wrought up, was
never contemplated by me! You must accuse
Oliver the Bad, and his own folly. I upbraided
him roundly, scoundrel that he is, for having at-
tributed to me the criminal intention of violating
a sanctuary consecrated to the Virgin Mother of
God. Never shall our sweet Lady Saint Mary
have such cause to be displeased with me : to
that I pledge my word, as a prince and a Chris-
tian."
" Heaven hears you, sire," the Prior said gravely,
and added not another word. The eyes of the two
met, across the silence, and the keen eyes of the
King sank before those of the religious, who
seemed to be reading his inmost thought.
" You begged me to pardon a wretch," contin-
ued the King, " a perjured felon, undeserving of
any mercy. He is a kinsman of yours; but I fear,
Father, that he has taken advantage of you. Do
you know what that man has done for you and
for your virtuous community ? He stopped at
nothing. . . . You do know, you say ? Ah, well:
your charity is superhuman, sir monk. Following
Our Saviour's example, you pray for your murder-
ers. I should like to humor you, and to grant
you the only favor you have ever asked, since you
became a subject of mine. But pardon Maulnyi
that vile hypocrite! It would be infamous. I
have my duty to perform."
<pb>
" Perform it, then, sire," interrupted Fougereuse,
whose face had taken on an expression of chival-
rous indignation, "and be sure that you punish
those who are really guilty. This wretch, this
perjured felon, had once a heart. If he sank low,
and lived dishonorably, the blame must rest with
those who were the agents of his fall. The state-
craft of princes is a slaughterer of souls! and for
every such slaughter, you men of power, you
tempters, must give an account to God at the
Last Day."
"Pasques-Dieu!" The King was white with
suppressed fury. " Stop there ! " he cried. " Not
a syllable more. You endanger your reverend
head."
" It is yours to take; I proffer it to you without
remorse. May God have your Majesty in His
holy keeping!"
" You are certainly a strange being," the King
went on, after a pause. " I was wrong to feel an-
gry with you. Let us have a truce. I must see
Walter. If he be truly repentant, if he will atone
for his treacheries by a sincere self-accusation,
well and good: ' I will not the death of a sinner !'
Bring me to Maulny, Father Prior. . . . Why
should you hesitate? "
With bowed head and eyes downcast, the Bene-
dictine remained an instant in silent prayer; then
he straightened himself, and looked at the King.
"Come, sire," he said.
He rose, and Louis followed him, murmuring to
<pb>
himself: " Pasques-Dieu ! You will belong to me,
once I pardon Maulny."
The usual dimness of the crypt chamber was dis-
pelled by the strange flare of a torch of yellow
wax, burning at the bed's foot, and set in an altar
candelabrum. Beneath its mournful light, the
sick-bed itself seemed more than ever like a cata-
falque erected in a tomb. The heavy draperies
fell all around, their stiff folds resting on the floor.
A vague perfume of incense, still floating in the
air, testified that the Sacred Host had been borne
under those subterranean arches, for the viaticum
of a dying Christian. Lo'ic and Villepreux, one
as motionless as the other, stood behind the sput-
tering torch. Robert started, recognizing who
it was that, entering, lingered a moment in the
doorway. The Prior made a gesture towards
the couch. Louis advanced quickly, passed Ville-
preux by, without seeming to notice that the latter
saluted him on bended knee, and raised the curtain
which hid Walter de Maulny from him. He lay
on the pilow, emaciated, wan, his lips and eyelids
closed, his features stamped with suffering, but
also with an austere repose. The fugitive slept
so soundly, that neither the sudden echo of foot-
steps in the quiet room, nor the unwonted rays of
the torch, gleaming full in his face, troubled him
at all.
"Maulny! " the King called. There was no
response, nor even a movement.
Louis leaned over the sleeper, and touched his
<pb>
hand. It was icy, and he drew back, alarmed.
" He is not dead, is he, Father Prior ? "
"Sire, Walter de Maulny appeared this morn-
ing before the Judgment-seat of God. He has
nothing now to expect nor to fear from the justice
of this world. He cried to Heaven before he ex-
pired. May the Lord grant him absolution and
peace'"
The King hardly heard him, as he stood per-
fectly still, his gaze fixed on the cold dumb figure
which would carry to the grave the secrets of
Francis of Brittany. Maulny's demise interfered
with many new projects, and constituted a very
bitter disappointment. " The end came too soon,"
he said between his teeth. " A few hours later,
and " —
"Death is a sovereign who defers not to Kings.
. . . Your Majesty will not refuse a Hequiescat,
and holy water, to so old a friend?"
Louis accepted the little branch of evergreen
which Dom John offered, and mechanically
sprinkled the holy water over the mortal clay.
"How did he die? Did he tell you anything?
Did he leave any message?"
"He forgave his murderers." Dom John, an-
swering, looked again at the King.
"By Our Lady of Clery! " exclaimed Louis,
determined to let no innuendo reach him. " If
you brought that man to repentance and to a for-
giving mood, then you, Father, have wrought a
miracle which exceeds those of the Prophet Elias!
<pb>
co
3
a.
a
O
O
CL
<pb>
But the Lord has dealt with Walter: we must talk
of his sins no more. May he rest in peace! if
peace there be, anywhere, for a soul so corroded
with frantic ambition and devouring pride ! " The
King removed his cap as he spoke, and hurried
through a conventional prayer. He glanced care-
lessly at the dead man. What was a corpse to
him? But " Jesus, thou hope of contrite hearts! "
murmured the Prior, as his lips touched, for the
last time, the forehead of his old playfellow. Wal-
ter had expired in his arms, receiving his bless-
ing. Men who had ruined him might scorn his
hapless memory, but the priest who had saved
lum from despair was faithful to him, in the eye
of Heaven.
Some of the monks arrived to keep watch, until
the burial hour. Louis took the arm of Dom
John, and went out of the crypt, without further
speech.
As the King of France left the Priory, he
pressed affectionately the hands of Fougereuse,
and asked the assistance, in future, of his prayers
and his wise counsels. The royal diplomat wore
a courteous smile, and an air of earnestness. In-
deed, he would gladly have bartered Oliver le
Daim and Tristram 1'Heremite for a man of the
stamp of Dom John de Fougereuse; and he spared
neither promises nor flatteries. But the monk
maintained his formal respect, and his reserve.
" I wish that I might grant you some favor,
Father, before I go hence," said Louis, with his
<pb>
most winning affability. "Can you think of
nothing to ask?"
" Yes, one thing: oblivion."
Their eyes met again, as on the previous even-
ing. Louis XI. understood that the Prior of Our
Lady of Pity sought no dealings with the great
ones of this world, and neither sued them nor
feared them.
" Oblivion ? Not that, Father Prior. But you
shall have your own tranquillity of mind, and my
profound esteem."
When the King returned to the castle, le Daim
was awaiting him. "Oliver," he said, "I have
learned the explanation of an enigma. Whether
he be a great statesman or a great saint, that Fou-
gereuse is a master. 1 never saw one like him!
But unluckily, he is now the man of God, and
naught else. We shall have to let him alone."
"AndMaulny?"
" He died before I arrived, and he died with the
Last Sacraments. Do not talk about him. He
cheated, up to the very end. He could do noth-
ing that was loyal, first or last. Even his dying
was so inconvenient for me, so inopportune!"
"' If Thou, 0 Lord, will mark iniquities, Lord,
who shall stand it ?'" murmured Dom John, pros-
trate at Maulny's grave. "' For with thee there
is merciful forgiveness; and by reason of Thy law I
have waited for Thee, 0 Lord!'"
<pb>
Brother Louis and Villepreux, kneeling by the
stone cross, deciphered the new-cut inscription:
HERE LIES
IN HOPE OF THE RESURRECTION
WALTER FOULQUES DE MAULXY
SON OF JULIAN DE MAULNY AND OF BLANCHE DE
FOUGEREUSK WHO IN THIS MONASTERY
PASSED AWAY AT PEACE WITH GOD
ON THE XXX DAY OF APRIL, A.D. MCCCLXXVI.
Pray for him Mother of Sorrows.
Pray for him O Penitent Thief.
And a little below, was yet another line:
Hodie mecum in Paradiso.
THE END.
<pb>
.
<pb>
ADDQQOMD4flS7E
<pb>
<pb>
 </div>
<pb>
