<div id="contents" code="0" wordcount="3375">
<pb>
 THE
PENNSYLVANIA
STATE UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY
<pb>
<pb>
-7 .
/.I-'
<pb>
BOHN'S STANDARD LIBRARY.
THE WORKS OF OLIVER GOLDSMITH.
VOL. in.
<pb>
THE WORKS
OF
OLIVEE GOLDSMITH
A NEW EDITION, CONTAINING PIECES HITHERTO
UNCOLLECTED, AND A LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.
WITH NOTES FROM VARIOUS SOURCES BY
J. W. M. GIBBS.
Iff FIVK VOLUMES.
VOL. III.
THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD : POLITE LEARNING
IN EUROPE.
LONDON: GEOBGE BELL AND SONS, YORK STEEET,
COVENT GARDEN.
1885.
<pb>
V,
CH1SWICK PRESS :—C. \VHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT
CHANCERY LANE.
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE
UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
<pb>
ADVERTISEMENT TO THIS VOLUME.
THE text of the ' Citizen of the World' here given is mainly
that of the third edition, 1774, the latest that Goldsmith
could have had any hand in. To it is now added in foot-
notes, and for the first time, the dates and varying read-
ings of the Letters as they first appeared in the Public
Ledger of 1760-61. These dates and variations often
throw light not only upon the subject matter of the essays,
but upon the life, works, and times of the author.
The ' Enquiry into the Present State of Polite Learning'
is from the author's second edition, 1774. But so much
of the first edition having been omitted from the second,
and these omitted portions being now generally thought
to be at least as interesting as the rest—especially as
elucidating the story of Goldsmith's earliest struggles—
the rejected portions are reprinted partly in the form of
foot-notes and partly in an Appendix. These omitted por-
tions have been given only in part by previous editors.
The present edition is the first to give the whole.
LONDON, 1885.
<pb>
PAGE
THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD 1
APPENDIX TO THE PRESENT EDITION.—
I. THE BRAVERY OF THE ENGLISH COMMON SOLDIERS . 447
II. ON THE CHARACTER or ENGLISH OFFICERS . . 450
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE PRESENT STATE or POLITE LEARNING
IN El-ROPE 405
APPENDIX TO THE ENQUIRY 529
<pb>
[Full title page of the first collected edition, in two volumes, 1762.]
THE
CITIZEN OF THE WORLD;
OB
LETTERS
FROM A
CHINESE PHILOSOPHER,
RESIDING IN LONDON,
TO HIS
FRIENDS IN THE EAST.
VOLUME THE FIRST.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR ;
AND
Sold by J. NEWBERY and W. BRISTOW, in St. Paul's Church-yard;
J. LEAKE and W. FREDERICK, at Bath; B. COLLINS, at Salisbury ;
and A. M. SMART AND Co., at Reading.
MDCCLXII.
<pb>
 [THE 'Citizen of the World' originally appeared in the Public Ledger
newspaper of 1760-61, under the title ' Letters.'' The Letters were
afterwards collected, and, with some alterations and additions, pub-
lished in 1762, in two volumes. Writing in the character of an Asiatic,
Goldsmith has skilfully availed himself of the opportunity afforded by
his plan of ridiculing some of our national peculiarities, by presenting
them in the light in which they must naturally appear to a man who
contemplates them for the first time, without those prejudices of educa-
tion and habit which are apt to conceal from us their absurdities. The
plan of the work, however, does not properly belong to Goldsmith.
No doubt' The Turkish Spy' (1684), Montesquieu's ' Lettres Persanes'
(1721), Madame de Grafigny's ' Lettres d'une Peruvienne' (about 1747),
D'Argens' 'Lettres Chinoises' (1750), Voltaire's "Asiatic," in the
'Philosophical Dictionary,' 1752. (see extract by Goldsmith himself in
our edition of the ' Bee,' p. 413, vol. ii.), and Horace Walpolc's' Letter
from Xo Ho, a Chinese Philosopher at London, to his friend Lien-Chi,
at Peking' (1757), some or one of these, and particularly, perhaps,
the last—which is said to have gone through five editions in a fort-
night—suggested to our author his plan.2 At the time Goldsmith
wrote, and a little later, China and its manners and customs figured
in the eyes of Europe somewhat as follows :—The government is purely
patriarchal. The emperor is unlimited in his authority; the succes-
sion to the throne is hereditary in the royal family, but the emperor has
the right of choosing from it his successor. The nobility is not here-
ditary, but honorary. It is divided into two classes,—the mandarins
of letters and those of arms: of these, the former is the more honour-
able, and from it the emperor chooses his councillors, great officers,
and viceroys. There are, properly, only three classes in China,—men
of letters, cultivators of the ground, and mechanics, including mer-
chants. There is no state religion in China; the emperor being of
one religion, the mandarins generally of another, and the great body
of the people of a third. The creed of the more intelligent classes is
1 That is, they were headed (after Letter III.) " Letter IV.," and so on,
having the sub-headings, " From Fum Hoam," &c. The " contents "
headings first appeared in the collected edition. The first number of
the Public Ledger (a newspaper still in existence) appeared Jan. 12,
1760, and Goldsmith's first "Letter" appeared in the number for Jan.
24. The Letters appeared about twice a week. The Public Ledger was
started by John Newbery, for whose British Magazine Goldsmith was at
the time writing; see Appendix to the ' Essays' in vol. i. By some ac-
counts Hugh Kelly the dramatist was the Ledger's first editor. Other
accounts assign that post to Griffith Jones, the brother of Giles Jones, who
has been put forward as the author of ' Goody Two-shoes': see our
' Life,' vol. i.,p. 19, the ' Goody Two-shoes'preface in vol. iv.,&c.—ED.
2 The title ' Citizen of the World' perhaps came from its occurrence
in Letters XX. and XXIII., pp. 74 and 87 ; or from the occurrence in
the Voltaire memoir (vol. iv.); and these uses may have come from the
ancient saying quoted in the Essay on ' National Prejudices,' p. 323,
vol. i.—ED.
III. B
<pb>
a species of Deism; and they adopt, as their code of morals, the
precepts of Confucius. But the great mass of the people are, in reality,
idolaters divided -into innumerable sects,' each with its peculiar tenets
and superstitions. The most numerous is the sect of Tao-sse, or Laou-
tsze, the worshippers of Fob (Fuh, or Buddha), frequently alluded to
in the following Letters. The manners of the Chinese appear to have
undergone scarcely any change from the earliest period of their history.
Their excess of ceremony, in their intercourse with each other, appears
very ridiculous to strangers. " It is an undisputed fact," says the Abbe
Grosier (1777), "that ceremonies form, in part, the basis of the Chinese
government." Their Li-pou, or Court of Ceremonies, of which the
" Discontented Wanderers" correspondent, the venerable Fum Hoam,
appears to have been the worthy president, is a tribunal of great autho-
rity, and it is always consulted by the emperor when he intends to confer
particular honours. Marriage is not only accounted honourable, but
enjoined as a religious duty. It is also, according to Sir George
Staunton, a measure of prudence among the poor,—the sons being bound
to support their parents. The women in China are never seen by their
intended husbands before marriage, neither does the wife, as in other
countries, bring along with her a dowry ; on the contrary, the husband
pays a sum of money to his father-in-law. The females, whea young,
have their feet confined, so as to prevent their growth, very small feet
being esteemed a great beauty; they also pluck their eyebrows, and
colour their teeth and nails. Singing and dancing are considered in-
famous. The religious sacrifices and public festivals are celebrated with
extraordinary magnificence, especially the Feast of Lanterns, so often
mentioned in the correspondence of Lien Chi Altangi. The Chinese are
particularly ceremonious in their mourning for dead relations, of which
there is a ludicrous, but scarcely exaggerated description given in the
following Letters, in Fum Hoam's behaviour on the death of his grand-
aunt. The Chinese generally are industrious and temperate : they excel
in agriculture, and are unequalled in many branches of mechanics. They
have a competent knowledge of mathematics and astronomy ; but, at
the same time, are unaccountably ignorant of many of those arts which
usually accompany civilization. In their persons the Chinese are not so
tall as the natives of Europe, but they are much fatter : they have
round broad faces, small eyes, and a flat nose; their complexion is
olive ; and they shave their heads, leaving only one tuft of hair behind.
The Chinese differ from all nations who make the least pretension to
civilization, in having no alphabet. Instead of letters they use certain
signs, which stand for distinct words, or rather syllables, and these, by
their combinations, form the written language. The number of these
primary words does not exceed four hundred, but by different accents
and changes of the tone of voice, they may be multiplied to any extent,
each tone giving the word a new meaning.
Goldsmith's chief authorities were evidently Le Comte, 1697, and Du
Halde, 1735. The later leading writers, however, including the Abb6
Grosier, Sir George Staunton, Lord Macartney, Sir John F. Davis,
Meadows, Hue, &c., though giving us more of detail, do not greatly
alter the sum of Chinese manners and customs as above sketched.—ED.]
<pb>
LETTER I-AOE
THE EDITOR'S PREFACE 9
I. Introduction—A character of the Chinese Philosopher . 13
II. The arrival of the Chinese in London—His motives for the
journey—Some description of the streets and houses . 14
III. The description of London continued—The luxury of the
English—Its benefits—The fine gentleman—The fine
lady 17
IV. English pride—Liberty—An instance of both—Newspapers
—Politeness 21
V. English passion for politics—A specimen of a newspaper-
Characteristics of the manners of different countries . 24
VI. Happiness lost by seeking after refinement—The Chinese
Philosopher's disgraces 29
VII. The tie of wisdom only to make us happy—The benefits of
travelling upon the morals of a philosopher . . .31
VIII. The Chinese deceived by a prostitute in the streets of
London ......... 33
IX. The licentiousness of the English with regard to women—
A character of a woman's man 35
X. The journey of the Chinese from Pekin to Moscow—The
customs of the Daures ....... 38
XI. The benefits of luxury, in making a people more wise and
happy .......... 41
XII. The funeral solemnities of the English—Their passion for
flattering epitaphs ....... 44
XIII. An account of Westminster Abbey—[First appearance of
the Man in Black] 47
XIV. The reception of the Chinese from a lady of distinction . 53
XV. Against cruelty to animals—A story from the Zendevesta
of Zoroaster ......... 56
XVI. Of falsehood propagated by books seemingly sincere . 58
XVII. Of the war now carried on between France and England,
with its frivolous motives ...... 62
XVIII. The story of the Chinese matron 65
XIX. The English method of treating women caught in adultery
—The Russian method 70
XX. Some account of the republic of letters in England . .73.
XXI. The Chinese goes to see a play 76
<pb>
LETTER PAGE
XXII. The Chinese philosopher's son made a slave in Persia 82
XXIII. The English subscription, in favour of the French
prisoners, commended ...... 84
XXIV. The vendors of quack medicines and nostrums ridiculed 88
XXV. The natural rise and decline of kingdoms, exemplified
in the history of the kingdom of Lao . . .90
XXVI. The character of the Man in Black, with some in-
stances of his inconsistent conduct . . .95
XXVII. The history of the Man in Black .... 99
XXVIII. On the great number of old maids and bachelors in
London—Some of the causes .... 106
XXIX. A description of a club of authors . . . .109
XXX. The proceedings of the club of authors . . .111
XXXI. The perfection of the Chinese in the art of gardening
—The description of a Chinese garden . . .118
XXXII. Of the degeneracy of some of the English nobility—A
mushroom feast among the Tartars . . . 121
XXXIII. The manner of writing among the Chinese—The East-
ern tales of magazines, &c. ridiculed . . . 124
XXXIV. Of the present ridiculous passion of the nobility for
painting 129
XXXV. The philosopher's son describes a lady, his fellow
captive 133
XXXVI. A continuation of his correspondence—The beautiful
captive consents to marry her lord . . . 136
XXXVII. The correspondence still continued—He begins to be
disgusted in the pursuit of his wisdom—An allegory
to prove its futility 138
XXXVIII. The Chinese philosopher praises the justice of a late
sentence, and instances the injustice of the Bang of
France, in the case of the Prince of Charolais . 143
XXXIX. The description of true politeness—Two letters of dif-
ferent countries, by ladies falsely thought polite at
home 147
XL. The English still have poets, though not versifiers . 152
XLI. The behaviour of the congregation in St. Paul's
church at prayers . . . . . . . 154
XLII. The history of China more replete with great actions
than that of Europe 157
XLIII. An apostrophe on the supposed death of Voltaire . 161
XLIV. Wisdom and precept may lessen our miseries, but can
never increase our positive satisfactions . .165
XLV. The ardour of the people of London, in running after
sights and monsters ...... 169
XLVI. [The Looking-glass of Lao,] A dream . . .174
XLVII. Misery best relieved by dissipation .... 178
XLVII1. The absurdity of persons in high station pursuing em-
ployments beneath them, exemplified in a fairy tale
TPrince Bonbennin-bonbobbin-bonbobbinet and his
Whito Mouse.] 180
<pb>
LETTEK PAOE
XLIX. The fairy tale continued 184
L. An attempt to define what is meant by English
liberty 187
LI. A bookseller's visit to the Chinese . . . .191
LII. The impossibility bf distinguishing men, in England,
by their dress—Two instances of this . . .195
LIII. The absurd taste for obscene and pert novels, such as
' Tristram Shandy,' ridiculed . . . .199
LIV. The character of an important trifler [Beau Tibbs.] 203
LV. His character continued, with that of his wife, his
house, and furniture ...... 206
LVI. Some thoughts on the present situation of affairs in the
different countries of Europe . . . .210
LVII. The difficulty of rising in literary reputation, without
intrigue or riches 214
LVIII. A visitation dinner described ..... 216
LIX. The Chinese philosopher's son escapes with the beau-
tiful captive from slavery . . . . .221
LX. The history of the beautiful captive .... 223
LXI. Proper lessons to a youth entering the world; with
fables suited to the occasion [The Conjurer and
the Tailor. The Goose and the Mastiff. The
Painter who tried to please the whole world.] . 229
LXII. An authentic history of Catharina Alexowna, wife of
Peter the Great 232
LXIII. The rise or decline of literature, not dependent on
man, but resulting from the vicissitudes of nature . 237
LXI V. The great exchange happiness for show—Their folly,
in this respect, of use to society .... 240
LXV. The history of a philosophic cobbler .... 243
LXVI. The difference between love and gratitude [Mencius
and the Hermit. The Story of the Fiddle-case.] . 246
LXVII. Theibllyof attempting to learn wisdom bybeing recluse 250
LXVIII. Quacks ridiculed — Some particularly mentioned
[Dr. Rock, Dr. Franks, Dr. Walker, &c.] . . 253
LXIX. The fear of mad dogs ridiculed . . . .258
LXX. Fortune proved not to be blind—The story of the
avaricious miller ....... 263
LXXI. The shabby beau, the Man in Black, the Chinese
philosopher, &c. at Vauxhall .... 266
LXXH. The marriage act censured ..... 271
LXXIIL Life endeared by age 276
LXXIV. The description of a little great man . . . 279
LXXV. The necessity of amusing each other with new books
insisted upon 282
LXXVI. The preference of grace to beauty : an allegory . 286
LXX VII. The behaviour of a shopkeeper and his journeyman . 289
LXXVIII. The French ridiculed after their own manner . . 292
LXXIX. The preparations of both theatres for a winter cam-
paign . . 294
<pb>
LETTEB PAGE
LXXX. The evil tendency of increasing penal laws, or enforc-
ing even those already in being with rigour . . 298
LXXXI. The ladies' trains ridiculed 302
LXXXII. The sciences useful in a populous state, prejudicial in
a barbarous one 305
LXXXIII. Some cautions on life, taken from a modern philosopher
of China 310
LXXXIV. The anecdotes of several poets, who lived and died in
circumstances of wretchedness . . . .313
LXXXV. The trifling squabbles of stageplayers ridiculed . 316
LXXXVI. The races of Newmarket ridiculed—The description
of a cart-race 322
LXXX VII. The folly of the western parts of Europe, in employing
the Russians to fight their battles .... 325
LXXXVIII. The ladies advised to get husbands—A story to this
purpose [The Man Fish.] 328
LXXXIX. The folly of remote or useless disquisitions among the
learned 332
XC. The English subject to the spleen .... 336
XCI. The influence of climate and soil upon the tempers and
dispositions of the English [The Englishman.] . 340
XCII. The manner in which some philosophers make artifi-
cial misery ........ 343
XCIII. The fondness of some to admire the writings of
lords, &c 346
XCIV. The philosopher's son is again separated from his
beautiful companion ...... 348
XCV. The father consoles him upon this occasion [On
Bearing Misfortune.] 351
XCVI. The condolence and congratulation upon the death of
the late king ridiculed—English mourning de-
scribed 353
XCVII. Almost every subject of literature has been already
exhausted ........ 356
XCVIII. A description of the Courts of Justice in Westminster
Hall 359
XCIX. A visit from the little beau—The indulgence with
which the fair sex are treated in several parts of Asia 362
C. A life of independence praised 365
CI. That people must be contented to be guided by those
whom they have appointed to govern—A story to
this effect [Takupi, the Innovating Minister of
Tipartala.] 368
OIL The passion for gaming among ladies ridiculed . . 371
CIII. The Chinese philosopher begins to think of quitting
England 373
CIV. The arts some make use of to appear learned . . 375
CV. The intended coronation described .... 378
CVI. Funeral elegies written upon the great ridiculed—A
specimen of one ....... 382
-
<pb>
LETTER PAQE
CVII. The English too fond of believing every report, with-
out examination—A story of an incendiary to this
purpose ........ 384
C VIII. The utility and entertainment which might result from
a journey into the East ...... 387
CIX. The Chinese philosopher attempts to find out famous
men 392
CX. Some projects for introducing Asiatic employments
into the courts of England 395
CXI. On the different sects in England, particularly Me-
thodists 399
CXII. An election described 402
CXIII. A literary contest of great importance, in which both
sides fight by epigram ...... 406
CXIV. Against the Marriage Act^-A Fable [The Genius
ofLove.] 411
CX V. On the danger of having too high an opinion of human
nature 415
CXVI. Whether love be a natural or a fictitious passion . 419
CXVII. A City Night-piece .. . . . . . .422
CXVIII. On the meanness of the Dutch at the Court of Japan 425
CXIX. On the distresses of the poor; exemplified in the life
of a private sentinel ...... 428
CXX. On the absurdity of some late English titles . . 434
CXXI. The irresolution of the English accounted for . . 437
CXXII. The manner of travellers, in their usual relations, ridi-
culed [A Journey from London to Kentish Town.] 439
CXXIII.1 The Conclusion . . . .443
APPENDIX
TO THE PBESENT EDITION.
Two ESSAYS ATTRIBUTED TO GOLDSMITH.
I. The Bravery of the English Common Soldiers . . 447
II. On the Character of English Officers . . . 450
1 From the numbering of the original collected editions there appear
to be only 119 Letters. This, however, is due to four duplications of
numbers. Thus there are two Letters numbered XXV., two numbered
XLIX., two LVII., and two CXVI. The last Letter of the series as
originally published in the' Public Ledger' was numbered CXVI.—ED.
r
<pb>
</div>
<pb>
<div id="citizen of the world" code="1" wordcount="169065">
 THE EDITOR'S PREFACE.
[By Goldsmith. It was issued with the first collected edition
of the Letters, 1762.]
THE schoolmen had formerly a very exact way of com-
puting the abilities of their saints or authors. Escobar,1
for instance, was said to have learning as five, genius as
four, and gravity as seven. Caramuel2 was greater than he.
His learning was as eight, his genius as six, and his gravity
as thirteen. Were I to estimate the merits of our Chinese
Philosopher by the same scale, I would not hesitate to state
his genius still higher; but as to his learning and gravity,
these, I think, might safely be marked as nine hundred
and ninety-nine, within one degree of absolute frigidity.3
Yet, upon his first appearance here, many were angry
not to find him as ignorant as a Tripoline ambassador, or
an envoy from Mujac. They were surprised to find a man
born so far from London—that school of prudence and
wisdom—endued even with a moderate capacity. They
expressed the same surprise at his knowledge, that the
Chinese do at ours. " How comes it," said they, " that
the Europeans, so remote from China, think with so much
justice and precision ? They have never read our books,
they scarcely know even our letters, and yet they talk and
reason just as we do." * The truth is, the Chinese and we
* Le Comte, vol. i, p. 210.—GOLDSMITH. 4
1 Antonio Escobar, the Jesuit and casuist, 1589-1669.—ED.
2 A monk of Madrid, b. 1606; d. 1689; the author of a system of
theology and other works.—ED.
3 In our vol. iv. will be found ' A Poetical Scale' (now first collected
into Goldsmith's works), wherein the English poets are estimated upon
the plan here cited.—ED.
4 ' Nonveaux M6moires sur 1'Etat present de la Chine, 1697.' Louis
le Comte was one of the six Jesuit missionaries sent to China in 1685,
<pb>
are pretty much alike. Different degrees of refinement,
and not of distance, mark the distinctions among man-
kind. Savages of the most opposite climates have, all,
but one character of improvidence and rapacity; and
tutored nations, however separate, make use of the very
same methods to procure refined enjoyment.
The distinctions of polite nations are few ; but such as
are peculiar to the Chinese, appear in every page of the
following correspondence. The metaphors and allusions
are all drawn from the East. Their formality our author
carefully preserves. Many of their favourite tenets in
morals are illustrated. The Chinese are always concise,
so is he; simple, so is he. The Chinese are grave and
sententious, so is he. But in one particular the resem-
blance is peculiarly striking: the Chinese are often dull;
and so is he. Nor has my assistance been wanting. We
are told, in an old romance, of a certain knight errant and
his horse who contracted an intimate friendship. The
horse most usually bore the knight; but in cases of extra-
ordinary despatch, the knight returned the favour, and
carried his horse. Thus, in the intimacy between my
author and me, he has usually given me a lift of his
Eastern sublimity, and I have sometimes given him a re-
turn of my colloquial ease.
Yet it appears strange in this season of panegyric, when
scarce an author passes unpraised, either by his friends or
himself, that such merit as our Philosopher's should be
forgotten. While the epithets of ingenious, copious, ela-
borate, and refined, are lavished among the mob, like
medals at a coronation, the lucky prizes fall on every side,
but not one on him. I could, on this occasion, make my-
self melancholy, by considering the capriciousness of
public taste, or the mutability of fortune; but, during
this fit of morality, lest my reader should sleep, I'll take
a nap myself, and when I awake, tell him my dream.
by command of the King of France. This work, and the later one by
Du Halde (1735), were our author's chief text-books on the manners,
&c., of China. In 1762, thirty-three years after Le Comte's death,
and two years after Goldsmith's date of writing, the faculty of divinity
of Paris fell foul of these ' Memoires,' on account of their extolling the
religion of the Chinese as being older than that of the Jews, and induced
the parliament to decree that the work should be burnt.—ED.
<pb>
I imagined the Thames was frozen over, and I stood by
its side. Several booths were erected upon the ice, and I
was told by one of the spectators, that FASHION FA.IB was
going to begin. He added, that every author who would
carry his works there, might probably find a very good re-
ception. I was resolved, however, to observe the humours
of the place in safety from the shore, sensible that ice waa
at best precarious, and having been always a little cowardly
in my sleep.
Several of my acquaintance seemed much more hardy
than I, and went over the ice with intrepidity. Some
carried their works to the fair on sledges, some on carts,
and those which were more voluminous, were conveyed in
waggons. Their temerity astonished me. I knew their
cargoes were heavy, and expected every moment they
would have gone to the bottom. They all entered the
fair, however, in safety, and each soon after returned, to
my great surprise, highly satisfied with his entertainment,
and the bargains he had brought away.
The success of such numbers at last began to operate
upon me. If these, cried I, meet with favour and safety,
some luck may, perhaps, for once, attend the unfortunate.
I am resolved to make a new adventure. The furniture,
frippery, and fireworks of China have long been fashionably
bought up. I'll try the fair with a small cargo of Chinese
morality. If the Chinese have contributed to vitiate our
taste, I'll try how far they can help to improve our under-
standing; but as others have driven into the market in
waggons, I'll cautiously begin, by venturing with a wheel-
barrow. Thus resolved, I baled up my goods, and fairly
ventured; when, upon just entering the fair, I fancied the
ice that had supported a hundred waggons before, cracked
under me, and wheelbarrow and all went to the bottom.
"Upon awaking from my reverie, with the fright, I can-
not help wishing that the pains taken in giving this corre-
spondence an English dress, had been employed in con-
triving new political systems, or new plots for farces. I
might then have taken my station in the world, either as
a poet or a philosopher, and made one in those little
societies where men club to raise each other's reputation.
But at present I belong to no particular class. I resemble
<pb>
one of those solitary animals that has been forced from its
forest to gratify human curiosity. My earliest wish was
to escape unheeded through life ; but I have been set up,
for halfpence, to fret and scamper at the end of my chain.
Though none are injured by my rage, I am naturally too
savage to court any friends by fawning — too obstinate to
be taught new tricks ; and too improvident to mind what
may happen. I am appeased, though not contented : too
indolent for intrigue, and too timid to push for favour, I
am — but what signifies what I am ?
Kai oil Tvyi], fieya \aiperf' TOV \ifiiv I vpov.
Ovdsv Ipoi \ vfjiiv irai&Tt TVS /w* £/«.
Fortune and Hope, adieu ! — I see my port :
Too long your dupe — be others now your sport.1
1 The translation is not in the original editions. Being in Percy's
edition, however, it may be by Goldsmith. — ED.
<pb>
LETTERS
FKOH A
CITIZEN OF THE WORLD
TO HIS FRIENDS IN THE EAST.
To Mr.
LETTEE I.1
—, Merchant, in London.
INTRODUCTION : A, CHARACTER OF THE CHINESE
PHILOSOPHER.
AMSTERDAM.
SIR,—Yours of the 13th instant, covering two bills, one
on Messrs. E. and D. value £4:78, 10s., and the other on
Mr. ****, value =£285, duly came to hand, the former of
which met with honour, but the other has been trifled
with, and I am afraid will be returned protested.
The bearer of this is my friend, therefore let him be
yours. He is a native of Honan in China, and one who
did me signal services, when he was a mandarine, and I a
factor, at Canton. By frequently conversing with the
English there, he has learned the language, though he is
entirely a stranger to their manners and customs. I am
told he is a philosopher—I am sure he is an honest 'man :
that to you will be his best recommendation, next to the
consideration of his being the friend of, Sir, yours, &c.
1 The first three letters had no numbers in the Public Ledger, a circum-
stance which seems to indicate that a series was not at first intended.
—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE II.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to , Merchant in Amsterdam.
ABRIVAL OF THE CHINESE PHILOSOPHER IN LONDON HIS
MOTIVES FOR THE JOURNBY SOME DESCRIPTION OF THE
STREETS AND HOUSES.
LONDON.
FRIEND OF MY HEART,—May the wings of peace rest upon
thy dwelling, and the shield of conscience preserve thee from
.vice and misery! For all thy favours accept my gratitude
and esteem, the only tributes a poor philosophic wanderer
can return. Sure> fortune is resolved to make me unhappy,
when she gives others a power of testifying their friend-
ship by actions, and leaves me only words to express the
sincerity of mine.
I am perfectly sensible of the delicacy with which you
endeavour to lessen your own merit and my obligations.
By calling your late instances of friendship only a return
for former favours, you would induce me to impute to your
justice what I owe to your generosity.
The services I did you at Canton, justice, humanity, and
my office, bade me perform; those you have done me since
my arrival at Amsterdam, no laws obliged you to, no jus-
tice required. Even half your favours would have been
greater than my most sanguine expectations.
The sum of money, therefore, which you privately con-
veyed into my baggage, when I was leaving Holland, and
which I was ignorant of till my arrival in London, I must
beg leave to return. You have been bred a merchant, and
I a scholar; you consequently love money better than I.
You can find pleasure in superfluity; I am perfectly con-
tent with what is sufficient. Take therefore what is yours ;
it may give you some pleasure, even though you have no
occasion to use it; my happiness it cannot improve, for I
have already all that I want.
My passage by sea from Rotterdam to England was
more painful to me than all the journeys I ever made on
land. I have traversed the immeasurable wilds of Mogul
<pb>
Tartary ; felt all the rigours of Siberian skies; I have had
my repose a hundred times disturbed by invading savages,
and have seen, without shrinking, the desert sands rise
like a troubled ocean all around me. Against these calami-
ties I was armed with resolution; but in my passage to
England, though nothing occurred that gave the mariners
any uneasiness, to one who was never at sea before, all was
a subject of astonishment and terror. To find the land
disappear—to see our ship mount the waves, swift as an
arrow from the Tartar bow—to hear the wind howling
through the cordage—to feel a sickness which depresses
even the spirits of the brave,—these were unexpected dis-
tresses, and, consequently, assaulted me, unprepared to re-
ceive them.
You men of Europe think nothing of» a voyage by sea.
With us of China, a man who has been from sight of land
is regarded upon his return with admiration. I have
known some provinces where there is not even a name for
the ocean. What a strange people, therefore, am I got
amongst, who have founded an empire on this unstable
element, who build cities upon billows that rise higher than
the mountains of Tipertala, and make the deep more for-
midable than the wildest tempest!
Such accounts as these, I must confess, were my first
motives for seeing England. These induced me to under-
take a journey of seven hundred painful days, in order to
examine its opulence, buildings, sciences, arts, and manu-
factures on the spot. Judge, then, how great is my dis-
appointment on entering London, to see no signs of that
opulence so much talked of abroad: wherever I turn, I
am presented with a gloomy solemnity in the houses, the
streets, and the inhabitants: none of that beautiful gild-
ing which makes a principal ornament in Chinese archi-
tecture. The streets of Nankin are sometimes strewed
with gold leaf; very different are those of London: in
the midst of their pavements a great lazy puddle moves
muddily along; heavy-laden machines, with wheels of
unwieldy thickness, crowd up every passage; so that a
stranger, instead of finding time for observation, is often
happy if he has time to escape from being crushed to
pieces.
<pb>
The houses borrow very few ornaments from architec-
ture ; their chief decoration seems to be a paltry piece
of painting, hung out at their doors or windows, at once
a proof of their indigence and vanity: their vanity, in
each having one of those pictures exposed to public view ;
and their indigence in being unable to get them better
painted. In this respect, the fancy of their painters is
also deplorable. Could you believe it ? I have seen five
black lions and three blue boars in less than the circuit of
half a mile; and yet you know that animals of these
colours are nowhere to be found except in the wild imagi-
nations of Europe.1
From these circumstances in their buildings, and from
the dismal looks of the inhabitants, I am induced to con-
clude that the nation is actually poor ; and that, like the
Persians, they make a splendid figure every where but at
home. The proverb of Xixofou is, that a man's riches
may be seen in his eyes: if we judge of the English by
this rule, there is not a poorer nation under the sun.
I have been here but two days, so will not be hasty in
my decisions. Such letters as I shall write to Fipsihi in
Moscow, I beg you'll endeavour to forward with all dili-
gence ; I shall send them open, in order that you may
take copies or translations, as you are equally versed in
the Dutch and Chinese languages. Dear friend, think of
my absence with regret, as I sincerely regret yours; even
while I write, I lament our separation. Farewell.
1 Addison had previously said of the tradesmen's sign-boards (Spec-
tator, No. 28):—" Our streets are filled with blue boars, black swans, and
red lions; not to mention flying pigs, and hogs in armour." Six years
after Goldsmith wrote most of the signs disappeared, the system of
numbering houses having been adopted, so says Cunningham, in 1764.
The style of the house of Goldsmith's own publisher, John Newbery,
illustrates the fact. During the publication of these Letters in the
Public Ledger, 1760-1, we find in Newbery's advertisements, &c., "J.
Newbery, at the Bible and Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard, opposite to
the North Door of the Church," an address which three or four years
later became " 65, St. Paul's Churchyard, opposite the North door," &e.
—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE IIL
From Lien Chi Altangi, to the care of Fipsihi, resident in
Moscow, to be forwarded by the Russian caravan to Fum
Hoam, First President of the Ceremonial Academy at
Pekin, in China.
THE DESCRIPTION OF LONDON CONTINUED THE LUXURY
OF THE ENGLISH ITS BENEFITS THE FINE GENTLE-
MAN—THE FINE LADY.
THINK not, O thou guide of my youth! that absence
can impair my respect, or interposing .trackless deserts
blot your reverend figure from my memory. The farther
I travel, I feel the pain of separation with stronger force ;
those ties that bind me to my native country and you, are
still unbroken. By every remove, I only drag a greater
length of chain.1
Could I find aught worth transmitting from so remote
a region as this to which I have wandered, I should gladly
send it; but, instead of this, you must be contented with
a renewal of my former professions, and an imperfect
account of a people with whom I am as yet but super-
ficially acquainted. The remarks of a man who has been
but three days in the country, can only be those obvious
circumstances which force themselves upon the imagina-
tion. I consider myself here as a newly created being,
introduced into a new world. Every object strikes with
wonder and surprise. The imagination, still unsated,
seems the only active principle of the mind. The most
trifling occurrences give pleasure, till the gloss of novelty
is worn away. When I have ceased to wonder, I may
possibly grow wise; I may then call the reasoning prin-
ciple to my aid, and compare those objects with each other,
which were before examined without reflection.
Behold me, then, in London, gazing at the strangers,
1 We find a repetition of this beautiful and affecting image in the
' Traveller,'—" And drags at each remove a lengthening chain."—Persy.
See line 10 of the poem, vol. i. p. 8.—ED.
III. C
<pb>
and they at me. It seems they find somewhat absurd in
my figure; and had I been never from home, it is possible
I might find an infinite fund of ridicule in theirs: but by
long travelling, I am taught to laugh at folly alone, and
to find nothing truly ridiculous but villainy and vice.
When I had just quitted my native country, and crossed
the Chinese wall, I fancied every deviation from the
customs and manners of China was a departing from
nature. I smiled at the blue lips and red foreheads of
the Tonguese ;l and could hardly contain when I saw the
Daures1 dress their heads with horns: the Ostiacsl
powdered with red earth; and the Calmuck' beauties
tricked out in all the finery of sheepskin, appeared highly
ridiculous. But I soon perceived that the ridicule lay not
in them, but in me ; that I falsely condemned others for
absurdity, because they happened to differ from a stan-
dard originally founded in prejudice or partiality.
I find no pleasure, therefore, in taxing the English with
departing from nature in their external appearance, which
is all I yet know of their character: it is possible they
only endeavour to improve her simple plan, since every
extravagance in dress proceeds from a desire of becoming
more beautiful than nature made us; and this is so
harmless a vanity, that I not only pardon, but approve it.
A desire to be more excellent than others is what actually
makes us so; and as thousands find a livelihood in
* society by such appetites, none but the ignorant inveigh
against them.
You are not insensible, most reverend Fum Hoam, what
numberless trades, even among the Chinese, subsist by
the harmless pride of each other. Your nose-borers, feet-
swathers, teeth-stainers, eyebrow-pluckers, would all want
bread, should their neighbours want vanity. These
vanities, however, employ much fewer hands in China
than in England; and a fine gentleman, or a fine lady,
here, dressed up to the fashion, seems scarcely to have a
single limb that does not suffer some distortions from
art.
To make a fine gentleman, several trades are required,
1 Tribes inhabiting Chinese and Russian Tartary.—ED.
<pb>
but chiefly a barber. You have undoubtedly heard of the
Jewish champion, whose strength lay in his hair. One
would think the English were for placing all wisdom
there. To appear wise, nothing more is requisite here
than for a man to borrow hair from the heads of all his
neighbours, and clap it, like a bush, on his own. The
distributors of law and physic stick on such quantities,
that it is almost impossible, even in idea, to distinguish
between the head and the hair.
Those whom I have been now describing affect the
gravity of the lion; those I am going to describe more
resemble the pert vivacity of smaller animals. The barber,
who is still master of the ceremonies, cuts their hair close to
the crown; and then, with a composition of meal and
hog's-lard, plasters the whole in such a manner as to
make it impossible to distinguish whether the patient
wears a cap or a plaster: but, to make the picture more
perfectly striking, conceive the tail of some beast, a grey-
hound's tail, or a pig's tail, for instance, appended to the
back of the head, and reaching down to the place where
tails in other animals are generally seen to begin: thus
betailed and bepowdered, the man of taste fancies he im-
proves in beauty, dresses up his hard-featured face in
smiles, and attempts to look hideously tender. Thus
equipped, he is qualified to make love, and hopes for
success more from the powder on the outside of his head,
than the sentiments within.
Yet when I consider what sort of a creature the fine
lady is, to whom he is supposed to pay his addresses, it is
not strange to find him thus equipped in order to please.
She is herself every whit as fond of powder, and tails, and
hog's-lard, as he. To speak my secret sentiments, most
reverend Fum, the ladies here are horridly ugly; I can
hardly endure the sight of them; they no way resemble
the beauties of China: the Europeans have a quite diffe-
rent idea of beauty from us. When I reflect on the
small-footed perfections of an Eastern beauty, how is it
possible I should have eyes for a woman whose feet are
ten inches long ? I shall never forget the beauties of my
native city of Nangfew. How very broad their faces; how
very short their noses; how very little their eyes; how
10W 7J
<pb>
very thin their lips; how very black their teeth; the
snow on the tops of Bao is not fairer than their cheeks ;
and their eyebrows are small as the line by the pencil of
Quamsi. Here a lady with such perfections would be
frightful. Dutch and Chinese beauties, indeed, have some
resemblance, but English women are entirely different:
red cheeks, big eyes, and teeth of a most odious whiteness,
are not only seen here, but wished for; and then they
have such masculine feet, as actually serve some for
walking!
Yet uncivil as Nature has been, they seem resolved to
outdo her in unkindness: they use white powder, blue
powder, and black powder for their hair, and a red powder
for the face on some particular occasions.
They like to have the face of various colours, as among
the Tartars of Koreki, frequently sticking on, with spittle,
little black patches on every part of it, except on the tip of
the nose, which I have never seen with a patch. You'll
have a better idea of their manner of placing these spots,
when I have finished a map of an English face patched up
to the fashion, which shall shortly be sent to increase your
curious collection of paintings, medals, and monsters.
But what surprises more than all the rest is what I have
just now been credibly informed of by one of this country.
" Most ladies here," says he, " have two faces; one face to
sleep in, and another to show in company. The first is
generally reserved for the husband and family at home;
the other put on to please strangers abroad: the family
face is often indifferent enough, but the out-door one looks
something better; this is always made at the toilet, where
the looking-glass and toad-eater sit in council, and settle
the complexion of the day."
I cannot ascertain the truth of this remark: however, it
is actually certain, that they wear more clothes within
doors than without; and I have seen a lady, who seemed
to shudder at a breeze in her own apartment, appear half
naked in the streets. Farewell.
'
<pb>
LETTER IV.
To the Same.
ENGLISH PRIDE—LIBERTY AN INSTANCE OF BOTH NEWS-
PAPERS POLITENESS.
THE English seem as silent as the Japanese, yet vainer
than the inhabitants of Siam. Upon my arrival I attri-
buted that reserve to modesty, which, I now find, has its
origin in pride. Condescend to address them first, and
you are sure of their acquaintance ; stoop to flattery, and
you conciliate their friendship and esteem. They bear
hunger, cold, fatigue, and all the miseries of life without
shrinking ; danger only calls forth their fortitude; they
even exult in calamity ; but contempt is what they cannot
bear. An Englishman fears contempt more than death;
he often flies to death as a refuge from its pressure; and
dies when he fancies the world has ceased to esteem him.
Pride seems the source not only of their national vices,
but of their national virtues also. An Englishman is
taught to love his king as his friend, but to acknowledge
no other master than the laws which himself has contri-
buted to enact. He despises those nations who, that one
may be free, are all content to be slaves ; who first lift a
tyrant into terror, and then shrink under his power as if
delegated from Heaven. Liberty is echoed in all their
assemblies; and thousands might be found ready to offer
up their lives for the sound, though perhaps not one of all
the number understands its meaning. The lowest mechanic,
however, looks upon it as his duty to be a watchful guar-
dian of his country's freedom, and often uses a language
that might seem haughty, even in the mouth of the Great
Emperor who traces his ancestry to the moon.
A few days ago, passing by one of their prisons, I could
not avoid stopping, in order to listen to a dialogue which
I thought might afford me some entertainment. The con-
versation was carried on between a debtor, through the
grate of his prison, a porter, who had stopped to rest his
<pb>
burthen, and a soldier at the window. The subject was
upon a threatened invasion from France, and each seemed
extremely anxious to rescue his country from the impend-
ing danger. " For my part," cries the prisoner, " the
greatest of my apprehensions is for our freedom; if the
French should conquer, what would become of English
liberty ? My dear friends, liberty is the Englishman's
prerogative; we must preserve that at the expense of our
lives ; of that the French shall never deprive us. It is not
to be expected that men who are slaves themselves would
preserve our freedom should they happen to conquer."—
" Ay, slaves," cries the porter, " they are all slaves, fit only
to carry burthens, every one of them. Before I would
stoop to slavery, may this be my poison," (and he held
the goblet in his hand), "may this be my poison—but I
would sooner 'list for a soldier."
The soldier, taking the goblet from his friend, with much
awe, fervently cried out, " It is not so much our liberties,
as our religion, that would suffer by such a change: ay,
our religion, my lads. May the devil sink me into flames,"
(such was the solemnity of his adjuration)," if the French
should come over, but our religion would be utterly un-
done ! " '—So saying, instead of a libation, he applied the
goblet to his lips, and confirmed his sentiments with a
ceremony of the most persevering devotion.
In short, every man here pretends to be a politician;
even the fair sex are sometimes found to mix the severity
of national altercation with the blandishments of love, and
1 A similar dialogue occurs in Byrom's ' Tom the Porter.' We quote
the following lines:—
" The Soldier, touch'd a little with surprise
To see his friend's indifference, replies,
' What you say, Tom, I own is very good;
But—our religion!' (and he d—n'd his blood,)
' What will become of our religion 1'—' True,'
Says the jail-bird, 'and our freedom too ?
If the Pretender,' rapt he out,' comes on,
Our liberties and properties are gone!'"
The persons engaged in the conversation and the locality are identical,
the group being a porter, a soldier, and a "poor debtor " of the Fleet
prison, behind his bars. Byrora was born in 1691, and died in 1763.—
ED.
<pb>
23
often become conquerors, by more weapons of destruction
than their eyes.
This universal passion for politics is gratified by Daily
Gazettes, as with us in China. But as in ours the Emperor
endeavours to instruct his people, in theirs the people
endeavour to instruct the administration. You must not,
however, imagine, that they who compile these papers have
any actual knowledge of the politics, or the government,
of a state; they only collect their materials from the oracle
of some coffeehouse, which oracle has himself gathered
them the night before from a beau at a gaming-table, who
has pillaged his knowledge from a great man's porter, who
has had his information from the great man's gentleman,
who has invented the whole story for his own amusement
the night preceding.
The English, in general, seem fonder of gaining the
esteem than the love of those they converse with. This
gives a formality to their amusements: their gayest con-
versations have something too wise for innocent relaxa-
tion : though in company you are seldom disgusted with
the absurdity of a fool, you are seldom lifted into rapture
by those strokes of vivacity, which give instant, though
not permanent, pleasure.
What they want, however, in gaiety, they make up in
politeness. You smile at hearing me praise the English
for their politeness ; you who have heard very different
accounts from the missionaries at Pekin, who have seen
such a different behaviour in their merchants and seamen
at home. But I must still repeat it, the English seem more
polite than any of their neighbours : their great art in this
respect lies in endeavouring, while they oblige, to lessen
the force of the favour. Other countries are fond of
obliging a stranger; but seem desirous that he should be
sensible of the obligation. The English confer their kind-
ness with an appearance of indifference, and give away
benefits with an air as if they despised them.
Walking, a few days ago, between an English and a
Frenchman in the suburbs of the city, we were overtaken
by a heavy shower of rain. I was unprepared ; but they
had each large coats, which defended them from what
seemed to me a perfect inundation. The Englishman,
 ^1 what
^lishman, ,
<pb>
seeing me shrink from the weather, accosted me thus:
"Psha, man, what dost shrink at? here, take this coat;
I don't want it; I find it no way useful to me; I had as
lief be without it." The Frenchman began to show his
politeness in turn. "My dear friend," cries he, "why
won't you oblige me by making use of my coat ? you see
how well it defends me from the rain; I should not
choose to part with it to others, but to such a friend as
you I could even part with my skin to do him service."
From such minute instances as these, most reverend
Fum Hoam, I am sensible your sagacity will collect in-
struction. The volume of nature is the book of know-
ledge ; and he becomes most wise who makes the most
judicious selection. Farewell.
LETTER V.
To the Same.
ENGLISH PASSION FOR POLITICS—A SPECIMEN OF A NEWS-
PAPER CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MANNERS OF DIF-
FERENT COUNTRIES.
I HAVE already informed you of the singular passion of
this nation for politics. An Englishman, not satisfied
with finding, by his own prosperity, the contending powers
of Europe properly balanced, desires also to know the
precise value of every weight in either scale. To gratify
this curiosity, a leaf of political instruction is served up
every morning with tea. When our politician has feasted
upon this, he repairs to a coffee-house, in order to rumi-
nate upon what he has read, and increase his collection;
from thence he proceeds to the ordinary, enquires what
news, and, treasuring up every acquisition there, hunts
about all the evening in quest of more, and carefully adds
it to the rest. Thus at night he retires home, full of the
important advices of the day: when lo! awaking next
morning, he finds the instructions of yesterday a collec-
tion of absurdity, or palpable falsehood. This one would
<pb>
25
think a mortifying repulse in the pursuit of wisdom; yet
our politician, no way discouraged, hunts on, in order to
collect fresh materials, and in order to be again dis-
appointed.
I have often admired the commercial spirit which pre-
vails over Europe; have been surprised to see them carry
on a traffic with productions that an Asiatic stranger
would deem entirely useless. It is a proverb in China
that a European suffers not even his spittle to be lost;
the maxim, however, is not sufficiently strong, since they
sell even their lies to great advantage. Every nation
drives a considerable trade in this commodity with their
neighbours.
An English dealer in this way, for instance, has only to
ascend to his work-house, and manufacture a turbulent
speech, averred to be spoken in the senate; or a report
supposed to be dropt at court; a piece of scandal that
strikes at a popular mandarine; or a secret treaty between
two neighbouring powers. When finished, these goods
are baled up, and consigned to a factor abroad, who sends
in return two battles, three sieges, and a shrewd letter
filled with dashes blanks, and stars * * * of great
importance.
Thus, you perceive, that a single Gazette is the joint
manufacture of Europe; and he who would peruse it
with a philosophical eye, might perceive in every para-
graph something characteristic of the nation to which it
belongs. A map does not exhibit a more distinct view
of the boundaries and situation of every country, than
its news does a picture of the genius and the morals of
its inhabitants. The superstition and erroneous delicacy
of Italy, the formality of Spain, the cruelty of Portugal,
the fears of Austria, the confidence of Prussia, the levity
of Prance, the avarice of Holland, the pride of England,
the absurdity of Ireland, and the national partiality of
Scotland, are all conspicuous in every page.
But, perhaps, you may find more satisfaction in a real
newspaper, than in my description of one; I therefore
send a specimen, which may serve to exhibit the manner
of their being written, and distinguish the characters of
the various nations which are united in its composition.
<pb>
NAPLES.—We have lately dug up here a curious Etrus-
can monument, broke in two in the raising. The charac-
ters are scarce visible: but Nugosi, the learned antiquary,
supposes it to have been erected in honour of Picus, a
Latin king, as one of the lines may be plainly distinguished
to begin with a P. It is hoped this discovery will pro-
duce something valuable, as the literati of our twelve
academies are deeply engaged in the disquisition.
PISA.—Since Father Fudgi, prior of St. Gilbert's, has
gone to reside at Rome, no miracles have been performed
at the shrine of St. Gilbert: the devout begin to grow
uneasy, and some begin actually to fear that St. Gilbert
has forsaken them with the reverend father.1
LUCCA.—The administrators of our serene republic have
frequent conferences upon the part they shall take in the
present commotions of Europe. Some are for sending a
body of their troops, consisting of one company of foot
and six horsemen, to make a diversion in favour of the
empress-queen;2 others are as strenuous asserters of the
Prussian interest: what turn these debates may take,
time only can discover. However, certain it is, we shall
be able to bring into the field, at the opening of the next
campaign, seventy-five armed men, a commander-in-ehief,
and two drummers of great experience.
SPAIN.—Yesterday the new king showed himself to his
subjects, and, after having stayed half an hour in his
balcony, retired to the royal apartment. The night con-
cluded, on this extraordinary occasion, with illuminations
and other demonstrations of joy.
The queen is more beautiful than the rising sun, and
reckoned one of the first wits in Europe. She had a
glorious opportunity of displaying the readiness of her
invention and her skill in repartee, lately at court. The
Duke of Lerma coming up to her with a' low bow and a
1 This is our author's first use of " Fudge." " Mr. Fudge " will be
found in Letter LI. See note to the better known occurrence of the
word in the ' Vicar of Wakefield' at p. 237 of our vol. i.—ED.
2 Maria-Theresa, Queen of Hungary. She married Francis of Lor-
raine, Grand Duke of Tuscany, who was elected Emperor of Germany
in 1745. In the " Seven Years' War," raging at this time (1760), the
combatants were the partizans of this " empress-queen " and those of
Frederic of Prussia.—ED.
<pb>
smile, and presenting a nosegay set with diamonds,
" Madame," cries he, " I am your most obedient humble
servant." " O, Sir," replies the queen, without any
prompter, or the least hesitation, " I'm very proud of the
very great honour you do me." Upon which she made a
low courtsy, and all the courtiers fell a-laughing at the
readiness and the smartness of her reply.
LISBON.—Yesterday we had an auto dafe, at which were
burned three young women, accused of heresy, one of
them of exquisite beauty, two Jews, and an old woman,
convicted of being a witch. One of the friars who
attended this last, reports, that he saw the devil fly out
of her at the stake in the shape of a flame of fire. The
populace behaved on this occasion with great good-
humour, joy, and sincere devotion.1
Our merciful sovereign has been for some time past
recovered of his fright: though so atrocious an attempt
deserved to exterminate half the nation, yet he has been
graciously pleased to spare the lives of his subjects, and
not above five hundred have been broke upon the wheel,
or otherwise executed, upon this horrid occasion.2
VIENNA.—We have received certain advices that a
party of twenty thousand Austrians, having attacked a
much superior body of Prussians, put them all to flight,
and took the rest prisoners of war.
1 The following is from the " Historical Chronicle " of the Gentle-
man's Magazine (vol. xxxi., p. 478):—"At the auto da fe at Lisbon,
on the 20th of Sept. [1761], the number of criminals amounted to fifty-
four, including three in effigy. Father Malagrida was the only person
bnrnt at the stake, for writing heretical books, and pretending to the
spirit of prophecy and revelation. This Auto exceeded all before it in
magnificence ; boxes were built round the Square da Eosico, and the
regiments of horse and foot attended upon duty. The nobility, judges,
and great officers of state were present, and a grand entertainment was
given in the convent by the inquisitor Nuno de Mello." This particular
auto, however, was evidently not Goldsmith's text for the above. His
article appeared in the Ledger, Feb. 7,1760, some year-and-a-half before
the roasting of Malagrida and his companions. By-the-way, another
version of why Malagrida suffered is mentioned in our ' Life of Gold-
smith,' p. 39, vol. i.—ED.
2 Probably a reference to the attempt upon the life of the King of
Portugal in Sept. 1758, and of the barbarous executions on account of it
of, among others, members of the noble families of D'Aveiro and Tavora,
which followed early the next year.—ED.
<pb>
BEBLIN.—We have received certain advices that a party
of twenty thousand Prussians, having attacked a much
superior body of Austrian s, put them to flight, and took a
great number of prisoners, with their military chest,
cannon, and baggage.
Though we have not succeeded this campaign to our
wishes, yet, when we think of him who commands us, we
rest in security : while we sleep, our king is watchful for
our safety.
PARIS.—We shall soon strike a signal blow. We have
seventeen flat-bottomed boats at Havre. The people are
in excellent spirits, and our ministers make no difficulty
in raising the supplies.
We are all undone; the people are discontented to the
last degree ; the ministers are obliged to have recourse to
the most rigorous methods to raise the expenses of the war.
Our distresses are great; but Madame Pompadour
continues to supply our king, who is now growing old,
with a fresh lady every night. His health, thank Heaven,
is still pretty well; nor is he in the least unfit, as was
reported, for any kind of royal exercitation. He was so
frightened at the affair of Damien,1 that his physicians
were apprehensive lest his reason should suffer ; but that
wretch's tortures soon composed the kingly terrors of his
breast.
ENGLAND.—Wanted an usher to an academy.—N.B.—
He must be able to read, dress hair, and must have had
the small-pox.
DUBLIN.—We hear that there is a benevolent subscrip-
tion on foot among the nobility and gentry of this king-
dom, who are great patrons of merit, in order to assist
Black and All Black, in his contest with the Paddereen
mare.2
We hear from Germany that Prince Ferdinand has
gained a complete victory, and taken twelve kettle-drums,
five standards, and four waggons of ammunition, prisoners
of war.
1 Damien, who attempted the life of Louis XV., 1757 : see note to the
' Traveller,' p. 19, vol. ii.—ED.
2 See Goldsmith's Letter to his brother-in-law, Hodson, p. 431,
vol. i.—ED.
<pb>
29
 EDINBURGH.—We are positive when we say that
Saunders M'Gregor, who was lately executed for horse-
stealing, is not a Scotsman, but born in Carrickfergus.—
Farewell.1
LETTEE VI.
Fum Hoam, First President of the Ceremonial Academy at
Pekin, to Lien Chi Altangi, the Discontented Wanderer;
by the way of Moscow.
HAPPINESS LOST BY SEEKING AFTER REFINEMENT THE
CHINESE PHILOSOPHER'S DISGRACES.
WHETHER sporting on the flowery banks of the river
Irtis, or scaling the steepy mountains of Douchenour;
whether traversing the black deserts of Kobi, or giving
lessons of politeness to the savage inhabitants of Europe ;
in whatever country, whatever climate, and whatever cir-
cumstances, all hail! May Tien, the Universal Soul, take
you under his protection, and inspire you with a superior
portion of himself!
How long, my friend, shall an enthusiasm for knowledge
continue to obstruct your happiness, and tear you from all
the connections that make life pleasing ? How long will
you continue to rove from climate to climate, circled by
thousands, and yet without a friend, feeling all the incon-
veniences of a crowd, and all the anxiety of being alone ?
I know you reply, that the refined pleasure of growing
every day wiser, is a sufficient recompense for every incon-
venience. I know you will talk of the vulgar satisfaction
of soliciting happiness from sensual enjoyment only ; and
probably enlarge upon the exquisite raptures of sentimental
1 We have noted a few differences in this Letter as it appears in the
Public Ledger (Feb. 7, 1760). The principal one occurs under tfle head-
ing " ENGLAND." The " Wanted an Usher," &c., does not appear in the
Ledger version. Instead is the following :—" ENGLAND. There was a
great concourse of nobility this season at Newmarket. The French are
preparing to invade us from Havre. Those, however, are only the efforts
of a sinking nation, for Admiral Hawke has come up with them, and
drubbed them heartily. There will be a great route this evening at the
house of her grace the duchess of Birmingham."—ED.
<pb>
bliss. Yet, believe me, friend, you are deceived ; all our
pleasures, though seemingly never so remote from sense,
derive their origin from some one of the senses. The most
exquisite demonstration in mathematics, or the most pleas-
ing disquisition in metaphysics, if it does not ultimately
tend to increase some sensual satisfaction, is delightful
only to fools, or to men who have by long habit contracted
a false idea of pleasure; and he who separates sensual and
sentimental enjoyments, seeking happiness from mind
alone, is in fact as wretched as the naked inhabitant of the
forest, who places all happiness in the first, regardless
of the latter. There are two extremes in this respect:
the savage, who swallows down the draught of pleasure
without staying to reflect on his happiness; and the sage,
who passeth the cup while he reflects on the conveniences
of drinking.
It is with a heart full of sorrow, my dear Altangi, that
I must inform you, that what the world calls happiness
must now be yours no longer. Our great Emperor's dis-
pleasure at your leaving China, contrary to the rules of
our government and the immemorial custom of the empire,
has produced the most terrible effects. Your wife, daughter,
and the rest of your family, have been seized by his order,
and appropriated to his use; all, except your son, are now
the peculiar property of him who possesses all: him I
have hidden from the officers employed for this purpose;
and even at the hazard of my life I have concealed him.
The youth seems obstinately bent on finding you out,
wherever you are; he is determined to face every danger
that opposes his pursuit. Though yet but fifteen, all his
father's virtues and obstinacy sparkle in his eyes, and
mark him as one destined to no mediocrity of fortune.
You see, my dearest friend, what imprudence has brought
thee to: from opulence, a tender family, surrounding
friends, and your master's esteem, it has reduced thee to
want, persecution, and, still worse, to our mighty monarch's
displeasure. Want of prudence is too frequently the want
of virtue; nor is there on earth a more powerful advocate
for vice than poverty. As I shall endeavour to guard
thee from the one, so guard thyself from the other ; and
still think of me with affection and esteem.—Farewell.
<pb>
LETTER VII.
From Lien Chi Altangi to Fum Hoam, First President of
the Ceremonial Academy at Pekin, in China.
THE TIE OF WISDOM ONLY TO MAKE US HAPPY ' THE
BENEFITS OF TRAVELLING UPON THE MORALS OF A
PHILOSOPHER.
The Editor thinks proper to acquaint the reader, that the greatest part
of the following letter seems to him to be little more than a rhapsody
of sentences borrowed from Confucius, the Chinese philosopher.2
A WIFE, a daughter, carried into captivity to expiate my
offence—a son, scarce yet arrived at maturity, resolving to
encounter every danger in the pious pursuit of one who
has undone him,—these indeed are circumstances of dis-
tress : though my tears were more precious than the gem
of Golconda, yet would they fall upon such an occasion.
But I submit to the stroke of Heaven: I hold the
volume of Confucius in my hand, and, as I read, grow
humble, and patient, and wise. We should feel sorrow,
says he, but not sink under its oppression. The heart of
a wise man should resemble a mirror, which reflects every
object without being sullied by any. The wheel of for-
tune turns incessantly round ; and who can say within
himself, I shall to-day be uppermost ? We shall hold
the immutable mean that lies between insensibility and
anguish ; our attempts should not be to extinguish nature,
but to repress it; not to stand unmoved at distress, but
endeavour to turn every disaster to our own advantage.
Our greatest glory is, not in never falling, but in rising
every time we fall.
I fancy myself at present, O thou reverend disciple of
Tao,3 more than a match for all that can happen. The chief
1 "Tie," or "tye," as it is spelt in the first (1762) edition, seems
here to mean obligation. The sentence, perhaps, should read, " The tie
(or obligation) of wisdom is to make us happy."—ED.
2 The sayings of Confucius exist in a book called the " Lun-Yu."—ED.
3 Tao, Taou, Tao-sse, or Laou-tsze; see p. 2.—ED.
<pb>
business of my life has been to procure wisdom, and the
chief object of that wisdom was to be happy. My atten-
dance on your lectures, my conferences with the mission-
aries of Europe, and all my subsequent adventures upon
quitting China, were calculated to increase the sphere of
my happiness, not my curiosity. Let European travellers
cross seas and deserts merely to measure the height of a
mountain, to describe the cataract of a river, or tell the
commodities which every country may produce: merchants
or geographers, perhaps, may find profit by such discoveries;
but what advantage can accrue to a philosopher from such
accounts, who is desirous of understanding the human
heart, who seeks to know the men of every country, who
desires to discover those differences which result from
climate, religion, education, prejudice, and partiality ?
I should think my time very ill bestowed, were the
only fruits of my adventures to consist in being able to tell,
that a tradesman of London lives in a house three times
as high as that of our great Emperor; that the ladies
wear longer clothes than the men; that the priests are
dressed in colours which we are taught to detest; and
that their soldiers wear scarlet, which is with us the
symbol of peace and innocence. How many travellers are
there who confine their relations to such minute and use-
less particulars! For one who enters into the genius of
those nations with whom he has conversed,—who discloses
their morals, their opinions, the ideas which they entertain
of religious worship, the intrigues of their ministers, and
their skill in sciences, there are twenty who only mention
some idle particulars, which can be of no real use to a true
philosopher. All their remarks tend neither to make them-
selves nor others more happy; they no way contribute to
control their passions, to bear adversity, to inspire true
virtue, or raise a detestation of vice.
Men may be very learned, and yet very miserable ; it is
easy to be a deep geometrician, or a sublime astronomer,
but very difficult to be a good man. I esteem, therefore,
the traveller who instructs the heart, but despise him who
only indulges the imagination. A man who leaves home
to mend himself and others is a philosopher ; but he who
goes from country to country, guided by the blind impulse
<pb>
of curiosity, is only a vagabond. From Zerdusht' down
to him of Tyanea,21 honour all those great names who en-
deavour to unite the world by their travels : such men grew
wiser as well as better, the farther they departed from
home, and seemed like rivers, whose streams are not only
increased, but refined, as they travel from their source.
For my own part, my greatest glory is, that travelling
has not more steeled my constitution against all the
vicissitudes of climate, and all the depressions of fatigue,
than it has my mind against the accidents of fortune, or
the accesses of despair. Farewell.
LETTER VIII.
To the Same.
THE CHINESE DECEIVED BY A PROSTITUTE IN THE STREETS
OF LONDON.
How insupportable, O thou possessor of heavenly wis-
dom, would be this separation, this immeasurable distance
from my friend, were I not able thus to delineate my
heart upon paper, and to send thee daily a map of my
mind !
I am every day better reconciled to the people among
whom I reside, and begin to fancy, that in time I shall
find them more opulent, more charitable, and more hos-
pitable than I at first imagined. I begin to learn some-
what of their manners and customs, and to see reasons for
several deviations which they make from us, from whom
all other nations derive their politeness, as well as their
original.
1 The Persian Zoroaster, the supposed author of the Zendavesta.—ED.
: Apollonius of Tyanea, or rather Tyana, a Pythagorean philosopher
who pretended to skill in magic. He travelled into the East, and ob-
tained some reputation by his pretended miracles, which Hierocles com-
pares with the miracles of our Saviour. He was contemporary with the
Emperor Domitian.—B.
 III. D
<pb>
In spite of taste, in spite of prejudice, I now begin to
think their women tolerable. I can now look on a
languishing blue eye without disgust, and pardon a set of
teeth, even 'though whiter than ivory. I now begin to
fancy there is no universal standard for beauty. The
truth is, the manners of the ladies in this city are so very
open, and so vastly engaging, that I am inclined to pass
over the more glaring defects of their persons, since com-
pensated by the more solid, yet latent, beauties of the
mind. What though they want black teeth, or are de-
prived of the allurements of feet no bigger than their
thumbs, yet still they have souls, my friend; such souls—
so free, so pressing,- so hospitable, and so engaging!—
I have received more invitations in the streets of London
from the sex in one night, than I have met with at Pekin
in twelve revolutions of the moon.
Every evening, as I return home from my usual solitary
excursions, I am met by several of those well-disposed
daughters of hospitality, at different times, and in diffe-
rent streets, richly dressed, and with minds not less noble
than their appearance. You know that nature has in-
dulged me with a person by no means agreeable ; yet are
they too generous to object to my homely appearance;
they feel no repugnance at my broad face and flat nose;
they perceive me to be a stranger, and that alone is a
sufficient recommendation. They even seem to think it
their duty to do the honours of the country by every act
of complaisance in their power. One takes me under the
arm, and in a manner forces me along; another catches
me round the neck, and desires to partake in this office of
hospitality; while a third, kinder still, invites me to
refresh my spirits with wine. Wine is in England reserved
only for the rich; yet here even wine is given away to the
stranger!
A few nights ago, one of these generous creatures,
dressed all in white, and flaunting like a meteor by my
side, forcibly attended me home to my own apartment.
She seemed charmed with the elegance of the furniture,
and the convenience of my situation; and well indeed she
might, for I have hired an apartment for not less than
two shillings of their money every week. But her civility
<pb>
did not rest here; for, at parting, being desirous to know
the hour, and perceiving my watch out of order, she
kindly took it to be repaired by a relation of her own,
which, you may imagine, will save some expense; and
she assures me, that it will cost her nothing. I shall
have it back in a few days, when mended, and am pre-
paring a proper speech, expressive of my gratitude on the
occasion: " Celestial excellence!" I intend to say,
" happy I am in having found out, after many painful
adventures, a land of innocence, and a people of humanity :
I may rove into other climes, and converse with nations
yet unknown, but where shall I meet a soul of such purity
as that which resides in thy breast! Sure thou hast been
nurtured by the bill of the Shin Shin, or sucked the breasts
of the provident Gin Hiung. The melody of thy voice
could rob the Chong Fou of her whelps, or inveigle the
Boh that lives in the midst of the waters. Thy servant
shall ever retain a sense of thy favours ; and one day boast
of thy virtue, sincerity, and truth, among the daughters
of China." Adieu.
 LETTER IX.
To the Same.
THE LICENTIOUSNESS OF THE ENGLISH WITH REGARD TO
WOMEN A CHARACTER OF A WOMAN'S MAN.
I HAVE been deceived ! She whom I fancied a daughter
of paradise, has proved to be one of the infamous disciples
of Han! I have lost a trifle; I have gained the conso-
lation of having discovered a deceiver. I once more,
therefore, relax into my former indifference with regard
to the English ladies; they once more begin to appear
disagreeable in my eyes. Thus is my whole time passed
in forming conclusions which the next minute's experience
may probably destroy; the present moment becomes a
comment on the past, and I improve rather in humility
than wisdom.
<pb>
Their laws and religion forbid the English to keep
more than one woman; I therefore concluded, that pros-
titutes were banished from society. I was deceived;
every man here keeps as many wives as he can maintain:
the laws are cemented with blood,1 praised and disregarded.
The very Chinese, whose religion allows him two wives,
takes not half the liberties of the English in this par-
ticular. Their laws may be compared to the books of the
Sybils,—they are held in great veneration, but seldom
read, or seldomer understood; even those who pretend to
be their guardians, dispute about the meaning of many of
them, and confess their ignorance of others. The law,
therefore, which commands them to have but one wife, is
strictly observed only by those for whom one is more
than sufficient, or by such as have not money to buy two.
As for the rest, they violate it publicly, and some glory
in its violation. They seem to think, like the Persians,
that they give evident marks of manhood by increasing
their seraglio. A mandarine, therefore, here generally
keeps four wives, a gentleman three, and a stage-player
two. As for the magistrates, the country justices and
squires, they are employed first in debauching young
virgins, and then punishing the transgression.
From such a picture you will be apt to conclude, that
he who employs four ladies for his amusement, has four
times as much constitution to spare as he who is contented
with one; that a mandarine is much cleverer than a
gentleman, and a gentleman than a player; and yet it is
quite the reverse: a mandarine is frequently supported on
spindle shanks, appears emaciated by luxury, and is
obliged to have recourse to variety, merely from the
weakness, not the vigour, of his constitution, the number
of his wives being the most equivocal symptom of his
. virility.
Beside the country squire, there is also another set of
men, whose whole employment consists in corrupting
beauty : these the silly part of the fair sex call amiable;
the more sensible part of them, however, give them the
1 An allusion, perhaps, to the severity of our penal code at the time.
Goldsmith must be ranked among our earliest reformers in this parti-
cular.—ED.
<pb>
title of abominable. You will probably demand, what are
the talents of a man thus caressed by the majority of the
opposite sex ? what talents, or what beauty is he possessed
of, superior to the rest of his fellows ? To answer you
directly, he has neither talents nor beauty; but then he
is possessed of impudence and assiduity. With assiduity
and impudence, men of all ages, and all figures, may
commence admirers. I have even been told of some who
made professions of expiring for love, when all the world
could perceive they were going to die of old age: and, what
is more surprising still, such battered beaux are generally
most infamously successful.
A fellow of this kind employs three hours every morn-
ing in dressing his head, by which is understood only his
hair.
He is a professed admirer, not of any particular lady,
but of the whole sex.
He is to suppose every lady has caught cold every night,
which gives him an opportunity of calling to see how she
does the next morning.
He is, upon all occasions, to show himself in very great
pain for the ladies: if a lady drops even a pin, he is to
fly in order to present it.
He never speaks to a lady without advancing his mouth
to her ear, by which he frequently addresses more senses
than one.
Upon proper occasions, he looks excessively tender.
This is performed by laying his hand upon his heart,
shutting his eyes, and showing his teeth.
He is excessively fond of dancing a minuet with the
ladies, by which is only meant walking round the floor
eight or ten times with his hat on, affecting great gravity,
and sometimes looking tenderly on his partner.
He never affronts any man himself, and never resents
an affront from another.
He has an infinite variety of small talk upon all occa-
sions, and laughs when he has nothing more to say.
Such is the killing creature who prostrates himself to
the sex till he has undone them; all whose submissions
are the effects of design, and who, to please the ladies,
almost becomes himself a lady.
<pb>
LETTER X.
To the Same.
THE JOUBNEY OF THE CHINESE FROM PEKIN TO MOSCOW THE CUSTOMS OF THE DAtJRES.
I HATE hitherto given you no account of my journey
from China to Europe—of my travels through countries
where Nature sports in primeval rudeness, where she pours
forth her wonders in solitude—countries, from whence the
rigorous climate, the sweeping inundation, the drifted de-
sert, the howling forest, and mountains of immeasurable
height banish the husbandman, and spread extensive de-
solation—countries, where the brown Tartar wanders for a
precarious subsistence, with a heart that never felt pity,
himself more hideous than the wilderness he makes.
You will easily conceive the fatigue of crossing vast
tracts of land, either desolate, or still more dangerous by
its inhabitants,—the retreat of men, who seem driven from
society, in order to make war upon all the human race,
nominally professing a subjection to M^uscovy or China,
but without any resemblance to the countries on which
they depend.
After I had crossed the great wall, the first objects that
presented [themselves] were the remains of desolated cities,
and all the magnificence of venerable ruin. There were to
be seen temples of beautiful structure, statues wrought by
the hand of a master, and around, a country of luxuriant
plenty; but not one single inhabitant to reap the bounties
of nature. These were prospects that might humble the
pride of kings, and repress human vanity. I asked my
guide the cause of such desolation. These countries, says
he, were once the dominions of a Tartar prince ; and these
ruins, the seat of arts, elegance, and ease. This prince
waged an unsuccessful war with one of the emperors of
China; he was conquered, his cities plundered, and all his
subjects carried into captivity. Such are the effects of the
ambition of kings ! Ten dervises, says the Indian proverb,
<pb>
shall sleep in peace upon a single carpet, while two kings
shall quarrel, though they have kingdoms to divide them.
Sure, my friend, the cruelty and the pride of man have
made more deserts than Nature ever made! She is kind,
but man is ungrateful!
Proceeding in my journey through this pensive scene of
desolated beauty, in a few days I arrived among the Daures,
a nation still dependent on China. Xaizigar is their prin-
cipal city, which, compared with those of Europe, scarcely
deserves the name. The governors, and other officers, who
are sent yearly from Pekin, abuse their authority, and
often take the wives and daughters of the inhabitants to
themselves. The Daures, accustomed to base submission,
feel no resentment at those injuries, or stifle what they
feel. Custom and necessity teach even barbarians the
same art of dissimulation that ambition and intrigue in-
spire in the breasts of the polite. Upon beholding such
unlicensed stretches of power, alas ! thought I, how little
does our wise and good Emperor know of these intolerable
exactions ! These provinces are too distant for complaint,
and too insignificant to expect redress. The more distant
the government, the honester should be the governor to
whom it is intrusted ; for hope of impunity is a strong in-
ducement to violation.
The religion of the Daures is more absurd than even
that of the sectaries of Fohi.1 How would you be surprised,
O sage disciple and follower of Confucius ! you who believe
one eternal intelligent cause of all, should you be present
at the barbarous ceremonies of this infatuated people.
How would you deplore the blindness and folly of man-
kind ! His boasted reason seems only to light him astray,
and brutal instinct more regularly points out the path to
happiness. Could you think it ? they adore a wicked
divinity; they fear him and they worship him; they
imagine him a malicious Being, ready to injure and ready
to be appeased. The men and women assemble at mid-
night in a hut, which serves for a temple. A priest stretches
himself on the ground, and all the people pour forth the
1 Fohi, or Foh, is not Fo-hi, or Fohy, the ancient emperor and sup-
posed founder of China before the Deluge of the Mosaic record, but Fuh,
or Buddha, as worshipped by the sect of Tao-sse.—ED.
<pb>
most horrid cries, while drums and timbrels swell the in-
fernal concert. After this dissonance, miscalled music,
has continued about two hours, the priest rises from the
ground, assumes an air of inspiration, grows big with the
inspiring demon, and pretends to a skill in futurity.
In every country, my friend, the bonzes, the brahmins,
and the priests, deceive the people : all reformations begin
from the laity; the priests point us out the way to heaven
with their fingers, but stand still themselves, nor seem to
travel towards the country in view.
The customs of this people correspond to their religion;
they keep their dead for three days on the same bed where
the person died; after which they bury him in a grave
moderately deep, but with the head still uncovered. Here
for several days they present him different sorts of meats;
which, when they perceive he does not consume, they fill
up the grave, and desist from desiring him to eat for the
future. How, how can mankind be guilty of such strange
absurdity ? to entreat a dead body, already putrid, to par-
take of the banquet! Where, I again repeat it, is human
reason ? not only some men, but whole nations, seem
divested of its illumination. Here we observe a whole
country adoring a divinity through fear, and attempting
to feed the dead. These are their most serious and most
religious occupations: are these men rational, or are not
the apes of Borneo more wise ?
Certain I am, O thou instructor of my youth ! that with-
out philosophers—without some few virtuous men, who
seem to be of a different nature from the rest of mankind
—without such as these, the worship of a wicked divinity
would surely be established over every part of the earth.
Fear guides more to their duty than gratitude: for one
man who is virtuous from the love of virtue, from the
obligation that he thinks he lies under to the Giver of all,
there are ten thousand who are good only from the appre-
sions of punishment. Could tjiese last be persuaded, as
the Epicureans were, that heaven had no thunders in store
for the villain, they would no longer continue to acknow-
ledge subordination, or thank that Being who gave them
existence. Adieu.
J
<pb>
LETTEE XL
To the Same: f
THE BENEFITS OF LUXURY, IN MAKING A PEOPLE MOBE
WISE AND HAPPY.
FROM such a picture of nature in primeval simplicity,
tell me, my much respected friend, are you in love with
fatigue and solitude ? Do you sigh for the severe frugality
of the wandering Tartar, or regret being born amidst the
luxury and dissimulation of the polite ? Bather tell me,
has not every kind of life vices peculiarly its own ? Is it
not a truth, that refined countries have more vices, but
those not so terrible; barbarous nations few, and they of
the most hideous complexion ? Perfidy and fraud are the
vices of civilized nations, credulity and violence those of
the inhabitants of the desert. Does the luxury of the one
produce half the evils of the inhumanity of the other ?
Certainly, those philosophers who declaim against luxury,
have but little understood its benefits; they seem insen-
sible, that to luxury we owe not only the greatest part of
our knowledge, but even of our virtues.
It may sound fine in the mouth of a declaimer, when he
talks of subduing our appetites, of teaching every sense to
be content with a bare sufficiency, and of supplying only
the wants of nature; but is there not more satisfaction in
indulging those appetites, if with innocence and safety,
than in restraining them ? Am not I better pleased in
enjoyment, than in the sullen satisfaction of thinking that
I can live without enjoyment? The more various our
artificial necessities, the wider is our circle of pleasure;
for all pleasures consist in obviating necessities as they
rise: luxury, therefore, as it increases our wants, increased
our capacity for happiness.1
1 This sentiment also occm-s in lines 213-14 of the ' Traveller:'
" For every want that stimulates the breast
Becomes a source of pleasure when redrest."—ED.
<pb>
Examine the history of any country remarkable for opu-
lence and wisdom, you will find they would never have
been wise had they not been first luxurious; you will find
poets, philosophers, and even patriots, marching in luxury's
train. The reason is obvious : we then only are curious
after knowledge, when we find it connected with sensual
happiness. The senses ever point out the way, and reflec-
tion comments upon the discovery. Inform a native of the
desert of Kobi, of the exact measure of the parallax of the
moon, he finds no satisfaction at all in the information;
he wonders how any could take such pains, and lay out
such treasures, in order to solve so useless a difficulty:
but connect it with his happiness, by showing that it im-
proves navigation—that by such an investigation he may
have a warmer coat, a better gun, or a finer knife,—and
he is instantly in raptures at so great an improvement.
In short, we only desire to know what we desire to
possess;l and, whatever we may talk against it, luxury adds
the spur to curiosity, and gives us a desire of becoming
more wise.
But not our knowledge only, but our virtues are im-
proved by luxury. Observe the brown savage of Thibet,
to whom the fruits of the spreading pomegranate supply
food, and its branches an habitation. Such a character
has few vices, I grant, but those he has are of the most
hideous nature: rapine and cruelty are scarcely crimes in
his eye; neither pity nor tenderness, which ennoble every
virtue, have any place in his heart; he hates his enemies,
and kills those he subdues. On the other hand, the polite
Chinese and civilized European, seem even to love their
enemies. I have just now seen an instance, where the
English have succoured those enemies, whom their own
countrymen actually refused to relieve.2
The greater the luxuries of every country, the more
closely, politically speaking, is that country united. Luxury
is the child of society alone. The luxurious man stands in
1 The Public Ledger has here, in addition:—" reason generally follows
sensation, and registers her discoveries."—ED.
2 In place of this paragraph, the Ledger has :—" Would you believe it,
when I tell you that I have just now seen an instance where the English
have succoured those enemies whom their own countrymen actually re-
fused to relieve ? " See Letter XXIIL—ED.
<pb>
need of a thousand different artists to furnish out his hap-
piness ; it is more likely, therefore, that he should be a
good citizen who is connected by motives of self-interest
with so many, than the abstemious man who is united to
none.
In whatsoever light, therefore, we consider luxury,
whether as employing a number of hands, naturally too
feeble for more laborious employment; as finding a variety
of occupation for others who might be totally idle; or as
furnishing out new inlets to happiness, without encroach-
ing on mutual property; in whatever light we regard it,
we shall have reason to stand up in its defence, and the
sentiment of Confucius still remains unshaken, " That we
should enjoy as many of the luxuries of life as are consis-
tent with our own safety, and the prosperity of others;
and that he who finds out a new pleasure, is one of the
most useful members of society."1
1 In this essay Goldsmith appears in conflict with his own argument
with Johnson of some twelve years later, as reported by Boswell. In
the 'Life of Johnson'(Bohn's edition, vol. iii., p. 256-7), we find:—>
" On Tuesday, April 13 [1773], he [Dr. Johnson] and Dr. Goldsmith
and I dined at General Oglethorpe's. Goldsmith expatiated on the
common topic that the race of our people was degenerated, and that this
was owing to luxury. JOHNSON. ' Sir, in the first place, I doubt the
fact. But supposing the stature of our people to be diminished, that is
not owing to luxury; for, Sir, consider to how very small a proportion
of our people luxury can reach. * * * Luxury, so far as it reaches the
poor, will do good to the race of people; it will strengthen and multiply
them. * * * Let us take a walk from Charing Cross to Whitechapel,
through, I suppose, the greatest series of shops in the world: what is
there in any of these shops (if you except the gin-shops) that can do
any human being any harm ?' GOLDSMITH. ' Well, Sir, I'll accept
your challenge. The very next shop to Northumberland House is a
pickle-shop.' JOHNSON. ' Well, Sir, do we not know that a maid can
in one afternoon make pickles sufficient to serve a whole family for a
year ? nay, that five pickle-shops can serve all the kingdom ? " Gold-
smith's teaching in the' Deserted Village' (1770), and elsewhere, agrees
better with his argument with Johnson than with the above essay. And
indeed, if the but once or twice expressed doubt as to whether Goldsmith
wrote all the ' Citizen' letters were to be seriously discussed, the diffe-
rence of opinion here cited would probably enter into the discussion. The
present Letter, however, appears here substantially as in the Public
Ledger of Feb. 18, 1760. And were its authenticity to be questioned,
its connection with Letter XXIII.—by the author's own reference at
p. 85—would to some extent bring Letter XXIII. also into the question.
<pb>
LETTER XII.
To the Same.
THE FUNERAL SOLEMNITIES OF THE ENGLISH THEIR
PASSION FOR FLATTERING EPITAPHS.
FROM the funeral solemnities of the Daures, who think
themselves the politest people in the world, I must make
a transition to the funeral solemnities of the English, who
think themselves as polite as they. The numberless cere-
monies which are used here when a person is sick appear
to me so many evident marks of fear and apprehension.
Ask an Englishman, however, whether he is afraid of
death, and he boldly answers in the negative; but observe
his behaviour in circumstances of approaching sickness,
and you will find his actions give his assertions the lie.
The Chinese are very sincere in this respect; they hate
to die, and they confess their terrors: a great part of their
life is spent in preparing things proper for their funeral.
A poor artisan shall spend half his income in providing
himself a tomb twenty years before he wants it; and
denies himself the necessaries of life, that he may be amply
provided for when he shall want them no more.
But people of distinction in England really deserve
pity, for they die in circumstances of the most extreme
distress. It is an established rule, never to let a man
know that he is dying: physicians are sent for, the clergy
are called, and every thing passes in silent solemnity round
the sick-bed. The patient is in agonies, looks round for
pity, yet not a single creature will say that he is dying.
If he is possessed of fortune, his relations entreat him to
make his will, as it may restore the tranquillity of his
mind. He is desired to undergo the rites of the church,
for decency requires it. His friends take their leave, only
because they do not care to see him in pain. In short, a
hundred stratagems are used to make him do what he
might have been induced to perform only by being told,
<pb>
" Sir, you are past all hopes, and had as good think de-
cently of dying."
Besides. all this, the chamber is darkened, the whole
house echoes to the cries of the wife, the lamentations of
the children, the grief of the servants, and the sighs of
friends. The bed is surrounded with priests and doctors
in black, and only flambeaux emit a yellow gloom. Where
is the man, how intrepid soever, that would not shrink at
such a hideous solemnity ? For fear of affrighting their
expiring friends, the English practise all that can fill them
with terror. Strange effect of human prejudice, thus to
torture, merely from mistaken tenderness !
You see, my friend, what contradictions there are in the
tempers of those islanders : when prompted by ambition,
revenge, or disappointment, they meet death with the ut-
most resolution: the very man who in his bed would have
trembled at the aspect of a doctor, shall go with intrepi-
dity to attack a bastion, or deliberately noose himself up
in his garters.
The passion of the Europeans for magnificent inter-
ments, is equally strong with that of the Chinese. When
a tradesman dies, his frightful face is painted up by an
undertaker, and placed in a proper situation to receive
' company : this is called lying in state. To this disagree-
able spectacle all the idlers in town flock, and learn to
loath the wretch dead whom they despised when living.
In this manner, you see some who would have refused a
shilling to save the life of their dearest friend, bestow
thousands on adorning their putrid corpse. I have been
told of a fellow, who, grown rich by the price of blood,
left it in his will that he should lie in state; and thus
unknowingly gibbeted himself into infamy, when he
might have otherwise quietly retired into oblivion.1
When the person is buried, the next care is to make
1 The author gives a similar illustration of this passion for funeral
pomp in Act i. of his ' Good-Natured Man' (vol. ii., p. 161), where he
makes Croaker say—" Well, well, it's a good child, so say no more ;
but come with me, and we shall see something that will give us a great
deal of pleasure, I promise you; old Ruggins, the curry-comb maker,
lying in state: I am told he makes a very handsome corpse, and
becomes his coffin prodigiously."—ED
<pb>
his epitaph: they are generally reckoned best which flatter
most; such relations, therefore, as have received most
benefits from the defunct, discharge this friendly office,
and generally flatter in proportion to their joy. When we
read those monumental histories of the dead, it may be
justly said, that " all men are equal in the dust"; for,
they all appear equally remarkable for being the most
sincere Christians, the most benevolent neighbours, and
the honestest men of their time. To go through a Euro-
pean cemetery, one would be apt to wonder how mankind
could have so basely degenerated from such excellent an-
cestors. Every tomb pretends to claim your reverence
and regret; some are praised for piety in those inscrip-
tions, who never entered the temple until they were dead;
some are praised for being excellent poets, who were
never mentioned, except for their dulness when living;
others for sublime orators, who were never noted except
for their impudence ; and others still, for military achieve-
ments, who were never in any other skirmishes but with
the watch. Some even make epitaphs for themselves, and
bespeak the reader's good-will. It were indeed to be
wished, that every man would early learn in this manner
to make his own; that he would draw it up in terms as
flattering as possible, and that he would make it the em-
ployment of his whole life to deserve it!'
I have not yet been in a place called Westminster
Abbey, but soon intend to visit it. There, I am told, I shall
see justice done to deceased merit: none, I am told, are
permitted to be buried there, but such as have adorned as
well as improved mankind. There, no intruders, by the
influence of friends or fortune, presume to mix their un-
hallowed ashes with philosophers, heroes, and poets.
Nothing but true merit has a place in that awful sanc-
tuary. The guardianship of the tombs is committed to
several reverend priests, who are never guilty, for a supe-
rior reward, of taking down the names of good men, to
make room for others of equivocal character, nor ever
1 In this spirit, it will be remembered, the Vicar of Wakefield wrote
and framed, " over the chimney-piece" a flattering epitaph on his wife,
hoping that she would "live up to it:" see the ' vicar,' chap, ii., p. 75,
vol. i.—ED.
<pb>
profane the sacred walls with pageants that posterity
cannot know, or shall blush to own.
I always was of opinion, that sepulchral honours of this
kind should be considered as a national concern, and not
trusted to the care of the priest of any country, how re-
spectable soever: but from the conduct of the reverend
personages, whose disinterested patriotism I shall shortly
be able to discover, I am taught to retract my former sen-
timents. It is true, the Spartans and the Persians made
a fine political use of sepulchral vanity : they permitted
none to be thus interred, who had not fallen in the vindi-
cation of their country. A monument thus became a real
mark of distinction; it nerved the hero's arm with ten-
fold vigour, and he fought without fear, who only fought
for a grave. Farewell.
LETTEE XIII.
To the Same.
AN ACCOUNT OF WESTMINSTER ABBEY [FIRST
APPEARANCE OF THE " MAN IN BLACK."]
I AM just returned from Westminster Abbey, the place
of sepulture for the philosophers, heroes, and kings of
England. What a gloom do monumental inscriptions,
and .all the venerable remains of deceased merit inspire ?
Imagine a temple marked with the hand of antiquity,
solemn as religious awe, adorned with all the magnificence
of barbarous profusion, dim windows, fretted pillars, long
colonnades, and dark ceilings. Think, then, what were my
sensations at being introduced to such a scene. I stood
in the midst of the temple, and threw my eyes round on
the walls, filled with the statues, the inscriptions, and the
monuments of the dead.
Alas ! I said to myself, how does pride attend the puny
child of dust even to the grave! Even humble as I am,
I possess more consequence in the present scene than the
<pb>
greatest hero of them all: they have toiled for an hour
to gain a transient immortality, and are at length retired
to the grave, where they have no attendant but the worm,
none to flatter but the epitaph.
As I was indulging such reflections, a gentleman dressed
in black,1 perceiving me to be a stranger, came up, entered
into conversation, and politely offered to be my instructor
and guide through the temple. " If any monument," said
he, " should particularly excite your curiosity, I shall en-
deavour to satisfy your demands." I accepted, with
thanks, the gentleman's offer, adding, that " I was come
to observe the policy, the wisdom, and the justice of the
English, in conferring rewards upon deceased merit. If
adulation like this," continued I, " be properly conducted,
as it can no ways injure those who are flattered, so it may
be a glorious incentive to those who are now capable of
enjoying it. It is the duty of every good government to
turn this monumental pride to its own advantage; to be-
come strong in the aggregate from the weakness of the
individual. If none but the truly great have a place in
this awful repository, a temple like this will give the
finest lessons of morality, and be a strong incentive to
true ambition. I am told, that none have a place here but
characters of the most distinguished merit." The man in
black seemed impatient at my observations, so I discon-
tinued my remarks, and we walked on together to take a
view of every particular monument in order as it lay.
As the eye is naturally caught by the finest objects, I
could not avoid being particularly curious about one monu-
ment, which appeared more beautiful than the rest: " That,"
said I to my guide, " I take to be the tomb of some very
great man. By the peculiar excellence of the workmanship,
and the magnificence of the design, this must be a trophy
raised to the memory of some king who has saved his coun-
try from ruin, or lawgiver who has reduced his fellow-
citizens from anarchy into just subjection."—" It is not
1 The " man in black " has been variously thought to be sketched from
Goldsmith's father and brother Henry. The truth probably is that the
character is' founded upon reminiscences of both those relations com-
bined with some studies of the author's self. See Letter XXVI.; also
vol. i., p. 3; and vol. ii., pp. 3, 37.—ED.
i
<pb>
requisite," replied my companion, smiling, " to have such
qualifications in order to have a very fine monument here:
more humble abilities will suffice."—" What, I suppose,
then, the gaining two or three battles, or the taking half
a score towns, is thought a sufficient qualification ?"—
" Gaining battles, or taking towns," replied the man in
black, " may be of service ; but a gentleman may have a
very fine monument here without ever seeing a battle or a
siege."—" This, then, is the monument of some poet, I
presume—of one whose wit has gained him immortality ? "
—" No, Sir," replied my guide, " the gentleman who lies
here never made verses ; and as for wit, he despised it in
others, because he had none himself."—" Pray tell me,
then, in a word," said I, peevishly, "what is the great man
who lies here particularly remarkable for ? "—" Remarkable,
Sir ? " said my companion; " why, Sir, the gentleman that
lies here is remarkable, very remarkable—for a tomb in
Westminster Abbey."—" But, head of my Ancestors ! how
has he got here ? I fancy he could never bribe the guar-
dians of the temple to give him a place: should he not be
ashamed to be seen among company where even moderate
merit would look like infamy ? "—" I suppose," replied the
man in black, " the gentleman was rich, and his friends, as
is usual in such a case, told him he was great. He readily
believed them; the guardians of the temple, as they got
by the self-delusion, were ready to believe him too ; so he
paid his money for a fine monument; and the workman,
as you see, has made him one of the most beautiful.
Think not, however, that this gentleman is singular in his
desire of being buried among the great; there are several
others in the temple, who, hated and shunned by the great
while alive, have come here, fully resolved to keep them
company now they are dead."
As we walked along to a particular part of the temple,
" There," says the gentleman, pointing with his finger,
" that is the Poet's Corner; there you see the monuments
of Shakespear, and Milton, and Prior, and Drayton."—
" Drayton! " I replied ; " I never heard of him before ;
but I have been told of one Pope—is he there ? "—" It is
time enough," replied my guide, " these hundred years ;
he is not long dead; people have not done hating him
III. E
<pb>
yet."—" Strange," cried I; " can any be found to hate a
man whose life was wholly spent in entertaining and in-
structing his fellow-creatures ? "—" Yes," says my guide,
" they hate him for that very reason. There are a set of
men called answerers of books, who take upon them to
watch the republic of letters, and distribute reputation by
the sheet; they somewhat resemble the eunuchs in a
seraglio, who are incapable of giving pleasure themselves,
and hinder those that would. These answerers have no
other employment but to cry out Dunce and Scribbler; to
praise the dead, and revile the living; to grant a man of
confessed abilities some small share of merit; to applaud
twenty blockheads in order to gain the reputation of can-
dour ; and to revile the moral character of the man whose
writings they cannot injure. Such wretches ai-e kept in
pay by some mercenary bookseller, or, more frequently,
the bookseller himself takes this dirty work off their
hands, as all that is required is to be very abusive and
very dull.1 Every poet of any genius is sure to find such
enemies; he feels, though he seems to despise their
malice; they make him miserable here, and in the pur-
suit of empty fame, at last he gains solid anxiety."
" Has this been the case with every poet I see here ? "
cried I. " Yes, with every mother's son of them," replied
he, " except he happened to be born a mandarine. If he
1 It is thought that Goldsmith struck at Griffiths of the Monthly
Review through this " mercenary bookseller." Dr. Campbell, who assisted
Percy in his 1801 edition of our author wrote to the bishop as follows
in 1790:—" Having mentioned Griffiths, I will confess to you that the
circumstance of him and his wife (I mean their altering and inter-
polating Goldsmith's criticisms on books for the Review) puzzles me. It
is one of the most valuable anecdotes before me, and my conscience bids
me report it, but my fears whisper to me that all the Reviews will
abuse me for so doing. But who s afraid 1" Vide ' Nichols' Literary
Illustrations,' vii., p. 781. Yet the seemingly promised exposure of
Griffiths did not, after all, appear in the 1801 edition. The Monthly's
rival, however, the Critical, upon more than one occasion let out the
secret of the Griffiths prison house, where wrote " obscure hirelings,
under the restraint of a bookseller and his wife, who presume to revise,
alter, and amend articles occasionally."—Critical Review, vii., 151, the
writer being, Mr. Forster says, Dr. Smollett. Kenrick, employed by
Griffiths, is likely enough to have been reflected on as one of the
" answerers of books." For Goldsmith's relations with Griffiths see our
vol. i., pp. 17, 244, 445 ; for Kenrick see vol. i., pp. 34, &c.—ED.
<pb>
has much money, he may buy reputation from your book-
answerers, as well as a monument from the guardians of
the temple."
" But are there not some men of distinguished taste, as
in China, who are willing to patronize men of merit, and
soften the rancour of malevolent dulness ? "
" I own there are many," replied the man in black;
" but, alas ! Sir, the book-answerers crowd about them,
and call themselves the writers of books ; and the patron
is too indolent to distinguish: thus poets are kept at a
distance, while their enemies eat up all their rewards at
the mandarine's table."
Leaving this part of the temple, we made up to an iron
gate, through which my companion told me we were to
pass, in order to see the monuments of the kings. Accord-
ingly, I marched up without further ceremony, and was
going to enter, when a person, who held the gate in his
hand, told me I must pay first. I was surprised at such
a demand; and asked the man, whether the people of
England kept a show ?—whether the paltry sum he de-
manded was not a national reproach ?—whether it was not
more to the honour of the country to let their magnificence,
or their antiquities, be openly seen, than thus meanly to
tax a curosity which tended to their own honour ? " As
for your questions," replied the gate-keeper, " to be sure
they may be very right, because I don't understand them ;
but, as for that there threepence, I farm it from one—who
rents it from another—who hires it from a third—who
leases it from the guardians of the temple,—and we all
must live." I expected, upon paying here, to see some-
thing extraordinary, since what I had seen for nothing
filled me with so much surprise: but in this I was disap-
pointed ; there was little more within than black coffins, rusty
armour, tattered standards, and some few slovenly figures
in wax. I was sorry I had paid, but I comforted myself
by considering it would be my last payment. A person
attended us, who, without once blushing, told a hundred
lies : he talked of a lady who died by pricking her finger ;
of a king with a golden head, and twenty such pieces of
absurdity. " Look ye there, gentlemen," says he, pointing
to an old oak chair, " there's a curiosity for ye; in that
<pb>
chair the kings of England were crowned: you see also a
stone underneath, and that stone is Jacob's pillow." I
could see no curiosity either in the oak chair or the stone :
could I, indeed, behold one of the old kings of England
seated in this, or Jacob's head laid upon the other, there
might be something curious in the sight; but in the pre-
sent case, there was no more reason for my surprise, than
if I should pick a stone from their streets, and call it a
curiosity, merely because one of the kings happened to
tread upon it as he passed in a procession.
From hence our conductor led us through several dark
walks and winding ways, uttering lies, talking to himself,
and flourishing a wand which he held in his hand. He
reminded me of the black magicians of Kobi. After we
had been almost fatigued with a variety of objects, he at
last desired me to consider attentively a certain suit of
armour, which seemed to show nothing remarkable.
" This armour," said he, " belonged to General Monk."—
" Very surprising that a general should wear armour! "—
" And pray," added he," observe this cap; this is General
Monk's cap."—" Very strange, indeed, very strange, that a
general should have a cap also! Pray, friend, what might
this cap have cost originally ? "—" That, Sir," says he, " I
don't know; but this cap is all the wages I have for my
trouble."—"A very small recompense, truly," said I.
" Not so very small," replied he, " for every gentleman
puts some money into it, and I spend the money."—
" What—more money ! still more money ! "—" Every
gentleman gives something, Sir."—" I'll give thee no-
thing," returned I; " the guardians of the temple should
pay you your wages, friend, and not permit you to squeeze
thus from every spectator. When we pay our money at the
door to see a show, we never give more as we are going out.
Sure, the guardians of the temple can never think they get
enough. Show me the gate; if I stay longer I may pro-
bably meet with more of those ecclesiastical beggars."
Thus leaving the temple precipitately, I returned to my
lodgings, in order to ruminate over what was great, and
to despise what was mean, in the occurrences of the day.
<pb>
LETTER XIV.
To the Same.
THE RECEPTION OF THE CHINESE FROM A LADY
OF DISTINCTION.
I WAS some days ago agreeably surprised by a message
from a lady of distinction, who sent me word, that she
most passionately desired the pleasure of my acquaintance,
and, with the utmost impatience, expected an interview.
I will not deny, my dear Fum Hoam, but that my vanity
was raised at such an invitation. I nattered myself that
she had seen me in some public place, and had conceived
an affection for my person, which thus induced her to de-
viate from the usual decorums of the sex. My imagina-
tion painted her in all the bloom of youth and beauty. I
fancied her attended by the Loves and Graces; and I set
out with the most pleasing expectations of seeing the con-
quest I had made.
When I was introduced into her apartment, my expecta-
tions were quiekly at an end; I perceived a little shrivelled
figure indolently reclined on a sofa, who nodded, by way
of approbation, at my approach. This, as I was af terward's
informed, was the lady herself, a woman equally dis-
tinguished for rank, politeness, taste, and understanding.
As I was dressed after the fashion of Europe, she had
taken me for an Englishman, and consequently saluted
me in her ordinary manner: but when the footman in-
formed her grace that I was the gentleman from China,
she instantly lifted herself from the couch, while her
«yes sparkled with unusual vivacity. " Bless me! can
this foe the gentleman that was born so far from home ?
What an unusual share of somethingness in his whole
appearance! Lord, how I am charmed with the outlandish
cut of his face ! how bewitching the exotic breadth of his
f oreh ead ! I would give the world to see him in his own
country dress. Pray, turn about, Sir, and let me see you
<pb>
behind. There, there's a travelled air for you! You that
attend there, bring up a plate of beef cut into small
pieces; I have a violent passion to see him eat. Pray,
Sir, have you got your chop-sticks about you ? It will be
so pretty to see the meat carried to the mouth with a
jerk. Pray, speak a little Chinese: I have learned some
of the language myself. Lord ! have you nothing pretty
from China about you; something that one does not
know what to do with ? I have got twenty things from
China that are of no use in the world. Look at those
jars; they are of the right pea-green: these are the
furniture! "—" Dear Madam," said I, " these, though they
may appear fine in your eyes, are but paltry to a Chinese;
but, as they are useful utensils, it is proper they should
have a place in every apartment."—" Useful, Sir! " re-
plied the lady ; " sure you mistake; they are of no use in
the world."—" What! are they not filled with an infusion
of tea, as in China ? " replied I. " Quite empty and use-
less, upon my honour, Sir."—" Then they are the most
cumbrous and clumsy furniture in the world, as nothing
is truly elegant but what unites use with beauty."-—" I
protest," says the lady, " I shall begin to suspect thee of
being an actual barbarian. I suppose you hold my two
beautiful pagods in contempt."—" What! " cried I, " has
Fohi spread his gross superstitions here also? Pagods
of all kinds are my aversion."—" A Chinese, a traveller,
and want taste! it surprises me. Pray, Sir, examine the
beauties of that Chinese temple which you see at the end
of the garden. Is there any thing in China more beauti-
ful ? "—" Where I stand, I see nothing, Madam, at the
end of the garden, that may not as well be called an Egyp-
tian pyramid as a Chinese temple; for that little building
in view is as like the one as t'other."—" What, Sir! is not
that a Chinese temple? you must surely be mistaken.
Mr. Freeze,1 who designed it, calls it one, and nobody dis-
1 Perhaps levelled at Sir William Chambers, then the high priest of
the fashion for Chinese gardening and architecture. He had just pub-
lished his ' Designs for Chinese Buildings,' &c. Sir John F. Davis
(diplomatist, traveller, and philologer), says ('China,' 1857, vol. i.,
p. 403):—" His description of Chinese gardening is a mere prose work
of imagination, without a shadow of foundation in reality."—ED.
<pb>
putes his pretensions to taste." I now found it vain to
contradict the lady in any thing she thought fit to
advance; so was resolved rather to act the disciple than
the instructor. She took me through several rooms, all
furnished, as she told me, in the Chinese manner; sprawling
dragons, squatting pagods, and clumsy mandarines, were
stuck upon every shelf: in turning round, one must have
used caution not to demolish a part of the precarious
furniture.
In a house like this, thought I, one must live continually
upon the watch: the inhabitant must resemble a knight in
an enchanted castle, who expects to meet an adventure at
every turning. " But, Madam," said I, " do not accidents
ever happen to all this finery ? "—" Man, Sir," replied the
lady, " is born to misfortunes, and it is but fit I should
have a share. Three weeks ago, a careless servant snapped
off the head of a favourite mandarine : I had scarce done
grieving for that, when a monkey broke a beautiful jar;
this I took the more to heart, as the injury was done me
by a friend. However, I survived the calamity; when
yesterday crash went half a dozen dragons upon the marble
hearth-stone: and yet I live; I survive it all: you can't
conceive what comfort I find under afflictions from philo-
sophy. There is Seneca, and Bolingbroke, and some
others, who guide me through life, and teach me to sup-
port its calamities." I could not but smile at a woman
who makes her own misfortunes, and then deplores the
miseries of her situation. Wherefore, tired of acting with
dissimulation, and willing to indulge my meditations in
solitude, I took leave just as the servant was bringing in a
plate of beef, pursuant to the directions of his mistress.
Adieu.
<pb>
LETTEE XV.
To the Same.
AGAINST CRUELTY TO ANIMALS A STORY FROM THE
ZENDAVESTA OF ZOROASTER.
THE better sort here pretend to the utmost compassion
for animals of every kind: to hear them speak, a stranger
would be apt to imagine they could hardly hurt the gnat
that stung them; they seem so tender, and so full of pity,
that one would take them for the harmless friends of the
whole creation; the protectors of the meanest insect or
reptile that was privileged with existence. And yet (would
you believe it ?) I have seen the very men who have thus
boasted of their tenderness, at the same time devouring
the flesh of six different animals tossed up in a fricassee.
Strange contrariety of conduct! they pity, and they eat
the objects of their compassion! The lion roars with
terror over its captive; the tiger sends forth its hideous
shriek to intimidate its prey; no creature shows any
fondness for its short-lived prisoner, except a man and a
cat.
Man was born to live with innocence and simplicity, but
he has deviated from nature; he was born to share the
bounties of heaven, but he has monopolized them; he was
born to govern the brute creation, but he is become their
tyrant. If an epicure now shall happen to surfeit on his
last night's feast, twenty animals the next day are to
undergo the most exquisite tortures, in order to provoke
his appetite to another guilty meal. Hail, O ye simple,
honest bramins of the East! ye inoffensive friends of all
that were born to happiness as well as you ! You never
sought a short-lived pleasure from the miseries of other
creatures! You never studied the tormenting arts of in-
genious refinement; you never surfeited upon a guilty
meal! How much more purified and refined are all your
sensations than ours! you distinguish every element with
the utmost precision: a stream untasted before is new
<pb>
luxury—a change of air is a new banquet, too refined for
Western imaginations to conceive.
Though the Europeans do not hold the transmigration
of souls, yet one of their doctors has, with great force of
argument, and great plausibility of reasoning, endeavoured
to prove that the bodies of animals are the habitations of
demons and wicked spirits, which are obliged to reside in
these prisons till the resurrection pronounces their ever-
lasting punishment; but are previously condemned to
suffer all the pains and hardships inflicted upon them by
man, or by each other, here. If this be the case, it may
frequently happen, that while we whip pigs to death, or
boil live lobsters, we are putting some old acquaintance,
some near relation, to excruciating tortures, and are serving
him up to the very same table where he was once the most
welcome companion.
" Kabul," says the Zendavesta,1 " was born on the rushy
banks of the river Mawra; his possessions were great,
and his luxuries kept pace with the affluence of his for-
tune ; he hated the harmless brahmins, and despised-their
holy religion; every day his table was decked out with
the flesh of a hundred different animals, and his cooks
had a hundred different ways of dressing it, to solicit even
satiety.
" Notwithstanding all his eating, he did not arrive at old
age; he died of a surfeit caused by intemperance: upon
this his soul was carried off, in order to take its trial before
a select assembly of the souls of those animals which his
gluttony had caused to be slain, and who were now ap-
pointed his judges.
" He trembled before a tribunal, to every member of
which he had formerly acted as an unmerciful tyrant: he
sought for pity, but found none disposed to grant it.
' Does he not remember,' cries the angry boar, ' to what
agonies I was put, not to satisfy his hunger, but his vanity ?
I was first hunted to death, and my flesh scarce thought
worthy of coming once to his table. Were my advice fol-
 1 Zendavesta, or Zend, a book ascribed to Zoroaster, is the bible of
the Magians, or fire-worshippers, of Persia. It contains numerous pas-
sages which are evidently taken from the Jewish Scriptures, particularly
from the books of Moses and the Psalms of David.—B.
'
<pb>
lowed, he should do penance in the shape of a hog, which
in life he most resembled.'
" ' I am rather,' cries a sheep upon the bench, ' for
having him suffer under the appearance of a lamb; we may
then send him through four or five transmigrations in the
space of a month.'—' Were my voice of any weight in the
assembly,' cries a calf, ' he should rather assume such a
form as mine; I was bled every day, in order to make my
flesh white, and at last killed without mercy.'—' Would it
not be wiser,' cries a hen, ' to cram him in the shape of a
fowl, and then smother him in his own blood, as I was
served?' The majority of the assembly were pleased with
this punishment, and were going to condemn him without
farther delay, when the ox rose up to give his opinion.—
' I am informed,' says this counsellor,' that the prisoner
at the bar has left a wife with child behind him. By my
knowledge in divination, I foresee that this child will be
a son, decrepit, feeble, sickly, a plague to himself and all
about him. What say you, then, my companions, if we
condemn the father to animate the body of his own son;
and by this means make him feel in himself those miseries
his intemperance must otherwise have entailed upon his
posterity?' The whole court applauded the ingenuity
of his torture: they thanked him for his advice. Kabul
was driven once more to revisit the earth; and his soul, in
the body of his own son, passed a period of thirty years,
loaded with misery, anxiety, and disease."
LETTER XVI.
To the Same.
OF FALSEHOOD PROPAGATED BY BOOKS SEEMINGLY
SINCERE.
I KNOW not whether I am more obliged to the Chinese
missionaries for the instruction I have received from them,
or prejudiced by the falsehoods they have made me believe.
By them I was told that the Pope was universally allowed
<pb>
to be a man, and placed at the head of the church; in
England, however, they plainly prove him to be a whore in
man's clothes, and often burn him in effigy as an impostor.
A thousand books have been written on either side of the
question : priests are eternally disputing against each
other; and those mouths that want argument are filled
with abuse. Which party must I believe ? or, shall I give
credit to neither ? When I survey the absurdities and
falsehoods with which the books of the Europeans are
filled, I thank heaven for having been born in China, and
that I have sagacity enough to detect imposture.
The Europeans reproach us with false history and fabu-
lous chronology; how should they blush to see their own
books, many of which are written by the doctors of their
religion, filled with the most monstrous fables, and attested
with the utmost solemnity ! The bounds of a letter do not
permit me to mention all the absurdities of this kind,
which, in my reading, I have met with. I shall confine
myself to the accounts which some of their lettered men
give of the persons of some of the inhabitants on our
globe: and, not satisfied with the most solemn assevera-
tions, they sometimes pretend to have been eye-witnesses
of what they describe.
A Christian doctor, in one of his principal performances,1
says, that it was not impossible for a whole nation to have
but one eye in the middle of the forehead. He is not
satisfied with leaving it in doubt; but, in another work,2
assures us, that the fact was certain, and that he himself
was an eye-witness of it. " When," says he, " I took a
journey into Ethiopia, in company with several other
servants of Christ, in order to preach the Gospel there, I
beheld, in the southern provinces of that country, a
nation which had only one eye in the midst of their
foreheads."
You will no doubt be surprised, reverend Fum, with this
author's effrontery; but, alas ! he is not alone in this story;
he has only borrowed it from several others who wrote
before him. Solinus creates another nation of Cyclops,
1 Augustin, de Civil. Dei, lib. xvi., p. 422.—GOLDSMITH.
2 Id., ad fratres in Eremo. Serm. xxxYii.—GOLDSMITH.
<pb>
the Arimaspians,1 who inhabit those countries that border
on the Caspian Sea. This author goes on to tell us of a
people of India, who have but one leg and one eye, and
yet are extremely active, run with great swiftness, and
live by hunting. These people we scarcely know how to
pity or admire: but the men whom Pliny calls Cynamolci,
who have got the heads of dogs, really deserve our com-
passion. Instead of language, they express their senti-
ments by barking. Solinus confirms what Pliny mentions;
and Simon Mayole, a French bishop, talks of them as of
particular and familiar acquaintances.2 "After passing
the deserts of Egypt," says he, " we met with the Kuno-
kephaloi, who inhabit those regions that border on
Ethiopia: they live by hunting; they cannot speak, but
whistle, their chins resemble a serpent's head; their hands
are armed with long sharp claws; their breast resembles
that of a greyhound; and they excel in swiftness and
agility." Would you think it, my friend, that these odd
kind of people are, notwithstanding their figure, exces-
sively delicate; not even an alderman's wife, or Chinese
mandarine, can excel them in this particular. " These
people," continues our faithful bishop, " never refuse
wine ; love roast and boiled meat: they are particularly
curious in having their meat well dressed, and spurn at it
if in the least tainted." " When the Ptolemies reigned in
Egypt," says he, a little farther on, "those men with dogs'
1 Solinus has not the merit of creating this nation, for Lucan has
given a similar description of the Arimaspians. Herodotus and Pliny
also mention them, and their incessant wranglings with the fabulous
griffins about gold mines, which they discovered by their powers of
divination. Milton alludes to this, in his sublime description of Satan's
flight :—
" As when a Gryphon through the wilderness
With winged course, o'er hill or moory dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian, who, by stealth,
Had from his wakeful custody purloin'd
The guarded gold," &c.
Paradise Lost, bk. ii., 11. 942, &c.—B.
2 Simon Maiolo was an Italian bishop (of Volturara): b. 1520; d.
1597. His book was published nearer two hundred than " a hundred
years ago " at Goldsmith's time of writing (as mentioned farther on).
No doubt, however, our author wrote from a later French edition.—ED.
<pb>
heads taught grammar and music." For men who had no
voices to teach music, and who could not speak, to teach
grammar, is, I confess, a little extraordinary. Did ever
the disciples of Fohi broach any thing more ridiculous ?
Hitherto we have seen men with heads strangely de-
formed, and with dogs' heads ; but what would you say if
you heard of men without any heads at all ? Pomponius
Mela, Solinus, and Aulus Gellius, describe them to our
hand: " The Blemise have a nose, eyes, and mouth on
their breast; or, as others will have it, placed on their
shoulders."
One would think that these authors had an antipathy to
the human form, and were resolved to make a new figure
of their own. But let us do them justice. Though they
sometimes deprive us of a leg, an arm, a head, or some
such trifling part of the body, they often as liberally
bestow upon us something that we wanted before. Simon
Mayole seems our particular friend in this respect; if he
has denied heads to one part of mankind, he has given
tails to another. He describes many of the English of his
time, which is not more than a hundred years ago, as
having tails. His own words are as follows : "In England
there are some families which have tails, as a punishment
for deriding an Augustin friar sent by St. Gregory, and
who preached in Dorsetshire. They sewed the tails of
different animals to his clothes; but soon they found that
those tails entailed on them and their posterity for ever."
It is certain that the author had some ground for this
description. Many of the English wear tails to their
wigs to this very day, as a mark, I suppose, of the an-
tiquity of their families, and perhaps as a symbol of those
tails with which they were formerly distinguished by
nature.
You see, my friend, there is nothing so ridiculous that
has not at some time been said by some philosopher. The
writers of books in Europe seem to think themselves
authorized to say what they please; and an ingenious
philosopher among them l has openly asserted, that he
would undertake to persuade the whole republic of readers
1 Fontenelle.—GOLDSMITH.
<pb>
to believe, that the sun was neither the cause of light nor
heat, if he could only get six philosophers on his side.
Farewell.
LETTER XVII.
To the Same.
OF THE WAR NOW CARRIED ON BETWEEN FRANCE AND
ENGLAND, WITH ITS FRIVOLOUS MOTIVES.
WERE an Asiatic politician to read the treaties of peace
and friendship that have been annually making for more
than a hundred years among the inhabitants of Europe,
he would probably be surprised how it should ever happen
that Christian princes could quarrel among each other.
Their compacts for peace are drawn up with the utmost
precision, and ratified with the greatest solemnity: to these
each party promises a sincere and inviolable obedience,
and all wears the appearance of open friendship and un-
reserved reconciliation. Yet, notwithstanding those trea-
ties, the people of Europe are almost continually at war.
There is nothing more easy than to break a treaty ratified
in all the usual forms, and yet neither party be the ag-
gressor. One side, for instance, breaks a trifling article
by mistake; the opposite party, upon this, makes a small
but premeditated reprisal; this brings on a return of
greater from the other; both sides complain of injuries and
infractions ; war is declared; they beat—are beaten; some
two or three hundred thousand men are killed; they grow
tired; leave off just where they began; and so sit coolly
down to make new treaties.
The English and French seem to place themselves fore-
most among the champion states of Europe. Though
parted by a narrow sea, yet are they entirely of opposite
characters; and, from their vicinity, are taught to fear and
admire each other. They are at present engaged in a very
destructive war, have already spilled much blood, are ex-
cessively irritated, and all upon account of one side's
desiring to wear greater quantities of furs than the other.
<pb>
The pretext of the war is about some lands a thousand
leagues off,—a country cold, desolate, and hideous—a
country belonging to a people who were in possession for
time immemorial. The savages of Canada claim a property
in the country in dispute; they have all the pretensions
which long possession can confer. Here they had reigned
for ages without rivals in dominion, and knew no enemies
but theprowling bear, or insidious tiger ;l their native forests
produced all the necessaries of life, and they found ample
luxury in the enjoyment. In this manner they might
have continued to live to eternity, had not the English
been informed that those countries produced furs in great
abundance. From that moment the country became an
object of desire: it was found that furs were things veiy
much wanted in England; the ladies edged some of their
clothes with furs, and muffs were worn both by gentlemen
and ladies.2 In short, furs were found indispensably neces-
sary for the happiness of the state ; and the king was con-
sequently petitioned to grant, not only the country of
Canada, but all the savages belonging to it, to the subjects
of England, in order to have the people supplied with
proper quantities of this necessary commodity.
So very reasonable a request was immediately complied
with, and large colonies were sent abroad to procure furs,
and take possession. The French, who were equally in
want of furs, (for they were as fond of muffs and tippets
as the English), made the very same request to their
monarch, and met with the same gracious reception from
their king, who generously granted what was not his to
give. Wherever the French landed, they called the country
their own; and the English took possession wherever they
came, upon the same equitable pretensions. The harm-
less savages made no opposition; and, could the intruders
have agreed together, they might peaceably have shared
this desolate country between them ; but they quarrelled
about the boundaries of their settlements, about grounds
and rivers to which neither side could show any other right
 1 Here, and in line 355 of the ' Deserted Village,' Goldsmith may be
supposed to allude to the " American tiger," or jaguar.—Er>.
2 The use of muffs by men is also mentioned in the ' Bee,' No. II.,
article " On Dress," p. 327 of our vol. ii.—ED.
'
<pb>
than that of power, and which neither could occupy but by
usurpation. Such is the contest, that no honest man can
heartily wish success to either party.
The war has continued for some time with various suc-
cess. At first the French seemed victorious; but the
English have of late dispossessed them of the whole
country in dispute. Think not, however, that success on
one side is the harbinger of peace; on the contrary, both
parties must be heartily tired, to effect even a temporary
reconciliation. It should seem the business of the victo-
rious party to offer terms of peace: but there are many in
England who, encouraged by success, are for still protract-
ing the war.1
The best English politicians, however, are sensible, that
to keep their present conquests would be rather a burthen
than an advantage to them; rather a diminution of their
strength than an increase of power. It is in the politic as
in the human constitution: if the limbs grow too large for
the body, their size, instead of improving, will diminish the
vigour of the whole. The colonies should always bear an
exact proportion to the mother country. When they grow
populous, they grow powerful, and, by becoming powerful,
they become independent also; thus subordination is de-
stroyed, and a country swallowed up in the extent of its
own dominions. The Turkish empire would be more for-
midable, were it less extensive—were it not for those
countries which it can neither command, nor give entirely
away—which it is obliged to protect, but from which it has
no power, to exact obedience.
Yet, obvious as these truths are, there are many English-
men who are for transplanting new colonies into this late
acquisition, for peopling the deserts of America with the
refuse of their countrymen, and (as they express it) with
the waste of an exuberant nation. But who are those un-
happy creatures who are to be thus drained away ? Not
the sickly, for they are unwelcome guests abroad as well as
1 The war was that which ended, a year or two later, with the cession
of Canada by the French. This Letter appeared in the Public Ledger of
March 13, 1760, when the terms of the peace were being discussed.
Goldsmith similarly counsels moderation after victory in his essay " On
Public Eejoicings for Victory " (see our vol. iv.), and elsewhere.—ED.
<pb>
at home; nor the idle, for they would starve as well behind
the Appalachian mountains as in the streets of London.
This refuse is composed of the laborious and enterprising
-—of such men as can be serviceable to their country at
home—of men who ought to be regarded as the sinews of
the people, and cherished with every degree of political
indulgence. And what are the commodities which this
colony, when established, is to produce in return ? why,
raw silk, hemp, and tobacco. England, therefore, must
make an exchange of her best and bravest subjects for
raw silk, hemp, and tobacco; her hardy veterans and
honest tradesmen must be truck'd for a box of snuff or a
silk petticoat. Strange absurdity ! Sure the politics of the
Daures are not more strange, who sell their religion, their
wives, and their liberty, for a glass bead, or a paltry pen-
knife.1 Farewell.
 LETTER XVIII.
To the Same.
THE STORY OF THE CHINESE MATRON.
THE English love their wives with much passion; the
Hollanders with much prudence. The English, when they
give their hands, frequently give their hearts; the Dutch
give the hand, but keep the heart wisely in their own pos-
session. The English love with violence, and expect
violent love in return; the Dutch are satisfied with the
slightest acknowledgments, for they give little away.
The English expend many of the matrimonial comforts
in the first year; the Dutch frugally husband out their
pleasures, and are always constant, because they are always
indifferent.
There seems very little difference between a Dutch bride-
groom and a Dutch husband. Both are equally possessed
of the same cool, unexpecting serenity; they can see
neither Elysium nor Paradise behind the curtain; and
1 The word in the Public Ledger version is " looking-glass."—ED.
III. F
<pb>
Yiffrow is not more a goddess on the wedding-night, than
after twenty years matrimonial acquaintance. On the
other hand, many of the English marry in order to have
one happy month in their lives; they seem incapable of
looking beyond that period; they unite in hopes of finding
rapture, and, disappointed in that, disdain ever to accept
of happiness. From hence we see open hatred ensue ; or,
what is worse, concealed disgust under the appearance of
fulsome endearment. Much formality, great civility, and
studied compliments are exhibited in public ; cross looks,
sulky silence, or open recrimination, fill up their hours of
private entertainment.
Hence I am taught, whenever I see a new married couple
more than ordinarily fond before faces, to consider them
as attempting to impose upon the company or themselves;
either hating each other heartily, or consuming that stock
of love in the beginning of their course, which should serve
them through their whole journey. Neither side should
expect those instances of kindness which are inconsistent
with true freedom or happiness to bestow. Love, when
founded in the heart, will show itself in a thousand unpre-
meditated sallies of fondness; but every cool deliberate
exhibition of the passion, only argues little understanding,
or great insincerity.
Choang was the fondest husband, and Hansi the most • 'c... s
endearing wife in all the kingdom of Korea : they were a „"* '
pattern of conjugal bliss; the inhabitants of the country '' v
around saw, and envied, their felicity: wherever Choang
came, Hansi was sure to follow; and in all the pleasures
of Hansi, Choang was admitted a partner. They walked
hand in hand wherever they appeared, showing every mark
of mutual satisfaction, embracing, kissing—their mouths
were for ever joined; and, to speak in the language of
anatomy, it was with them one perpetual anastomosis.1
Their love was so great, that it was thought nothing
could interrupt their mutual peace; when an accident hap-
pened, which, in some measure, diminished the husband's
assurance of his wife's fidelity; for love so refined as his
was subject to a thousand little disquietudes.
1 " Their mouths" to the end of the paragraph does not appear in
the Public Ledger version:—ED.
<pb>
Happening to go one day alone among the tombs that
lay at some distance from his house, he there perceived a
lady dressed in the deepest mourning, (being clothed all
over in white,) ' fanning the wet clay that was raised over
one of the graves with a large fan which she held in her
hand. Choang, who had early been taught wisdom in the
school of Lao, was unable to assign a cause for her pre-
sent employment; and coming up, civilly demanded the
reason. " Alas," replied the lady, her eyes bathed in
tears, " how is it possible to survive the loss of my hus-
band, who lies buried in this grave ? he was the best of
men, the tenderest of husbands; with his dying breath he
bid me never marry again till the earth over his grave
should be dry; and here you see me steadily resolving to
obey his will, and endeavouring to dry it with my fan.
I have employed two whole days in fulfilling his commands,
and am determined not to marry till they are punctually
obeyed, even though his grave should take up four days in
drying."
Choang, who was struck with the widow's beauty, could
not, however, avoid smiling at her haste to be married;
but concealing the cause of his mirth, civilly invited her
home; adding, that he had a wife who might be capable
of giving her some consolation. As soon as he and his
guest were returned, he imparted to Hansi, in private, what
he had seen, and could not avoid expressing his uneasiness
that such might be his own case if his dearest wife should
one day happen to survive him.
It is impossible to describe Hansi's resentment at so un-
kind a suspicion. As her passion for him was not only
great, but extremely delicate, she employed tears, anger,
frowns, and exclamations, to chide his suspicions; the
widow herself was inveighed against; and Hansi declared,
she was resolved never to sleep under the same roof with
1 Sir George Staunton, in his ' Fundamental Laws of China,' 1810,
p. Ixxv, extracts from the edict on mourning thus:—" The mourning
for the nearest among relations in the first degree shall be worn for
three years, and shall be made of the coarsest hempen cloth, without
being sewn at the borders." Sir John F. Davis, in ' The Chinese,' 1836,
vol. ii., p. 115, has it that " deep mourning" with the people of China
a " a long white garment without seam."—ED.
<pb>
a wretch, who, like her, could be guilty of such barefaced
inconstancy. The night was cold and stormy; however,
the stranger was obliged to seek another lodging, for
Choang was not disposed to resist, and Haiisi would have
her way.
The widow had scarcely been gone an hour, when an old
disciple of Choang's, whom he had not seen for many
years, came to pay him a visit. He was received with the
utmost ceremony, placed in the most honourable seat at
supper, and the wine began to circulate with great freedom.
Choang and Hansi exhibited open marks of mutual tender-
ness, and unfeigned reconciliation: nothing could equal
their apparent happiness; so fond a husband, so obedient
a wife, few could behold without regretting their own in-
felicity. When, lo! their happiness was at once disturbed
by a most fatal accident. Choang fell lifeless in an
apoplectic fit upon the floor. Every method was used, but
in vain, for his recovery. Hansi was at first inconsolable
for his death : after some hours, however, she found spirits
to read his last will. The ensuing day, she began to mora-
lize and talk wisdom ; the next day, she was able to com-
fort the young disciple; and on the third, to shorten along
story, they both agreed to be married.
There was now no longer mourning in the apartments ;
the body of Choang was now thrust into an old coffin, and
placed in one of the meanest rooms, there to lie unattended
until the time prescribed by law for his interment. In the
meantime, Hansi and the young disciple were arrayed in
the most magnificent habits ; the bride wore in her nose
a jewel of immense price, and her lover was dressed in all
the finery of his former master, together with a pair of
artificial whiskers that reached down to his toes. The
hour of their nuptials was arrived; the whole family sym-
pathized with their approaching happiness; the apart-
ments were brightened up with lights that diffused the
most exquisite perfume, and a lustre more bright than
noon-day. The lady expected her youthful lover in an
inner apartment with impatience; when his servant, ap-
proaching with terror in his countenance, informed her,
that his master was fallen into a fit which would certainly
be mortal, unless the heart of a man lately dead could be
<pb>
obtained, and applied to his breast. She scarcely waited
to hear the end of his story, when tucking up her clothes,
she ran with a mattock in her hand to the coffin where
Choang lay, resolving to apply the heart of her dead hus-
band as a cure for the living. She therefore struck the
lid with the utmost violence. In a few blows the coffin
flew open, when the body, which to all appearance had
been dead, began to move. Terrified at the sight, Hansi
dropped the mattock, and Ghoang walked out, astonished
at his own situation, his wife's unusual magnificence, and
her more amazing surprise. He went among the apart-
ments, unable to conceive the cause of so much splendour.
He was not long in suspense before his domestics informed
him of every transaction since he first became insensible.
He could scarcely believe what they told him, and went in
pursuit of Hansi herself, in order to receive more certain
information, or to reproach her infidelity. But she pre-
vented his reproaches : he found her weltering in blood;
for she had stabbed herself to the heart, being unable to
survive her shame and disappointment.
Choang, being a philosopher, was too wise to make any
loud lamentations : he thought it best to bear his loss with
serenity; so, mending up the old coffin where he had lain
himself, he placed his faithless spouse in his room ; and,
unwilling that so many nuptial preparations should be ex-
pended in vain, he the same night married the widow with
the large fan.
As they both were apprised of the foibles of each other
beforehand, they knew how to excuse them after marriage.
They lived together for many years in great tranquillity,
and not expecting rapture, made a shift to find content-
ment.1 Farewell.
1 This story was translated into French by Fere Dentrecolles, a Jesuit
missionary who died at Fekin in 1741; and Voltaire used it in his
' Zadig.' The original is more fully given by Sir John Davis in ' The
Chinese' (1836, vol. ii., pp. 113, &c.), where it is prefaced by some
exposition of the doctrines of Lao, of whom, it seems, Choang, or
Chuang-tsze, was one of the four principal disciples. This prefatory
matter yields the following:—" Riches, and the advantages which they
bring, are but a short and agreeable dream : honours and reputation
resemble a brilliant cloud, which soon vanishes. The affection of those
united by blood and other ties is commonly but a vain appearance; the
<pb>
LETTEE XIX.
To the same.
THE ENGLISH METHOD OF TREATING WOMEN CAUGHT IN
ADULTERY THE BUSSIAN METHOD.
THE gentleman dressed in black, who was my companion
through Westminster Abbey, came, yesterday, to pay me
a visit; and, after drinking tea, we both resolved to take a
walk together, in order to enjoy the freshness of the country,
which now begins to resume its verdure. Before we got out of
the suburbs, however, we were stopped in one of the streets
by a crowd of people, gathered in a circle round a man and
his wife, who seemed too loud and too angry to be under-
stood. The people were highly pleased with the dispute,
which, upon enquiry, we found to be between Dr. Cacafogo,1
an apothecary, and his wife. The doctor, it seems, coming
unexpectedly into his wife's apartment, found a gentle-
man there, in circumstances not in the least equivocal.2
The doctor, who was a person of nice honour, resolving
to revenge the flagrant insult, immediately flew to the
chimney-piece, and taking down a rusty blunderbuss, drew
the trigger upon the defiler of his bed: the delinquent
would certainly have been shot through the head, but that
the piece had not been charged for many years. The gal-
lant made a shift to escape through the window, but the
lady still remained ; and, as she well knew her husband's
temper, undertook to manage the quarrel without a second.
He was furious, and she loud; their noise had gathered
all the mob who charitably assembled on the occasion, not
to prevent, but to enjoy the quarrel.
most tender friendships may convert themselves into the bitterest strifes.
Let us not wear a yoke because it is of gold; nor bear the burthen of
chains, because they consist of jewels. Let us purify our minds, mode-
rate our desires, and detach ourselves from worldly affections : let us,
above all things, preserve ourselves in a state of liberty and joy. which
is independent of others."—ED.
1 In the Public Ledger it is Dr. Carbuncle.—ED.
2 For " not in the least," &c., we read, in the Public Ledger, " even
too strong for his suspicion."—ED.
4
.'*
<pb>
 " Alas! " said I to my companion, " what will become of
this unhappy creature thus caught in adultery ? Believe
me, I pity her from my heart; her husband, I suppose,
will show her no mercy. Will they burn her as in India,
or behead her as in Persia? Will they load her with
stripes as in Turkey, or keep her in perpetual imprison-
ment, as with us in China ? Prithee, what is the wife's
punishment in England for such offences ?"—" When a
lady is thus caught tripping," replied my companion,
" they never punish her, but the husband."—" You surely
jest," interrupted I; "I am a foreigner, and you would
abuse my ignorance ! "—" I am really serious," returned
he: " Dr. Cacafogo has caught his wife in the act; but,
as he had no witnesses, his small testimony goes for no-
thing ; the consequence, therefore, of his discovery will be,
that she will be packed off to live among her relations, and
the doctor must be obliged to allow her a separate main-
tenance."—" Amazing ! " cried I; "is it not enough that
she is permitted to live separate from the object she de-
tests, but must he give her money to keep her in spirits
too ? "—" That he must," said my guide, " and be called a
cuckold by all his neighbours into the bargain. The men
will laugh at him, the ladies will pity him ; and all that
his warmest friends can say in his favour will be ' that the
poor good soul has never had any harm in him.' "—" I
want patience ! " interrupted I: " What! are there no
private chastisements for the wife—no schools of penitence
to show her folly—no rods2 for such delinquentsp"—
" Psha, man," replied he, smiling; " if every delinquent
among us were to be treated in your manner, one half of the
kingdom would flog the other."
I must confess, my dear Fum, that if I were- an
English husband, of all things I would take care not
to be jealous, nor busily pry into those secrets my wife
was pleased to keep from me. Should I detect her
infidelity, what is the consequence ? If I calmly pocket
the abuse, I am laughed at by her and her gallant: if I
talk my griefs aloud, like a tragedy hero, I am laughed
at by the whole world. The course, then, I would
1 The word is " rods" in the first and third editions, and in the
Ledger and Percy, though Prior and Cunningham print " blows."—ED.
,he
ED.
<pb>
take would be, whenever I went out, to tell my wife
where I was going, lest I should unexpectedly meet her
abroad in company with some dear deceiver. Whenever
I returned, I would use a peculiar rap at the door, and
give four loud hems as I walked deliberately up the
staircase. I would never inquisitively peep under her bed,
or look behind the curtains. And even though I knew the
captain was there, I would calmly take a dish of my wife's
cool tea, and talk of the army with reverence.
Of all nations, the Eussians seem to me to behave most
wisely in such circumstances. The wife promises her hus-
band never to let him see her transgressions of this nature;
and he as punctually promises, whenever she is so detected,
without the least anger, to beat her without mercy: so
they both know what each has to expect; the lady trans-
gresses, is beaten, taken again into favour, and all goes on
as before.
When a Russian young lady, therefore, is to be married,
her father, with a cudgel in his hand, asks the bridegroom,
whether he chooses this virgin for his bride ? to which the
other replies in the affirmative. Upon this, the father,
turning the lady three times round, and giving her three
strokes with his cudgel on the back,—" My dear," cries
he, " these are the last blows you are ever to receive from
your tender father: I resign my authority, and my cudgel,
to your husband; he knows better than me the use of
either." The bridegroom knows decorum too well to ac-
cept of the cudgel abruptly; he assures the father that
the lady will never want it, and that he would not, for the
world, make any use of it: but the father, who knows
what the lady may want better than he, insists upon his
acceptance; upon this there follows a scene of Eussian
politeness, while one refuses, and the other offers, the
cudgel. The whole, however, ends with the bridegroom's
taking it; upon which the lady drops a courtesy in token
of obedience, and the ceremony proceeds as usual.
There is something excessively fair and open in this
method of courtship: by this both sides are prepared for
all the matrimonial adventures that are to follow. Mar-
riage has been compared to a game of skill for life: it is
generous in both parties thus to declare they are sharpers
<pb>
in the beginning. In England, I am told, both sides use
every art to conceal their defects from each other before
marriage, and the rest of their lives may be regarded as
doing penance for their former dissimulation. Farewell.
LETTER XX.
To the same.
SOME ACCOUNT OF THE REPUBLIC OF LETTERS
IN ENGLAND.1
THE Republic of Letters is a very common expression
among the Europeans; and yet when applied to the
learned of Europe, is the most absurd that can be ima-
gined ; since nothing is more unlike a republic than the
society which goes by that name. From this expression,
one would be apt to imagine that the learned were united
into a single body, joining their interests, and concurring
in the same design. From this one might be apt to com-
pare them to our literary societies in China, where each
acknowledges a just subordination, and all contribute to
build the temple of science, without attempting, from
ignorance or envy, to obstruct each other.
But very different is the state of learning here: every
member of this fancied republic is desirous of governing,
and none willing to obey ; each looks upon his fellow as a
rival, not an assistant in the same pursuit. They calum-
niate, they injure, they despise, they ridicule each other;
if one man writes a book that pleases, others shall write
books to show that he might have given still greater plea-
sure, or should not have pleased. If one happens to hit
upon something new, there are numbers ready to assure
the public that all this was no novelty to them or the
learned; that Cardanus, or Brunus, or some other author
1 The date of this Letter in the Public Ledger is March 20, 1760.—
ED.
<pb>
too dull to be generally read, had anticipated the discovery.
Thus, instead of uniting like the members of a common-
wealth, they are divided into almost as many factions as
there are men; and their jarring constitution, instead of
being styled a republic of letters, should be entitled an
anarchy of literature.
It is true, there are some of superior abilities who re-
verence and esteem each other; but their mutual admira-
tion is not sufficient to shield off the contempt of the crowd.
The wise are but few, and they praise with a feeble voice;
the vulgar are many, and roar in reproaches. The truly
great seldom unite in societies; have few meetings, no
cabals; the dunces hunt in full cry, till they have run
down a reputation, and then snarl and fight with each
other about dividing the spoil. Here you may see the
compilers and the book-answerers of every month, when
they have cut up some respectable name, most frequently
reproaching each other with stupidity and dulness; re-
sembling the wolves of the Russian forest, who prey upon
venison, or horse-flesh, when they can get it, but in cases
of necessity, lying in wait to devour each other. While
they have new books to cut up, they make a hearty meal;
but if this resource should unhappily fail, then it is that
critics eat up critics, and compilers rob from compilations.
Confucius observes, that it is the duty of the learned to
unite society more closely, and to persuade men to become
citizens of the world; but the authors I refer to are not
only for disuniting society, but kingdoms also: if the
English are at war with France, the dunces of France
think it their duty to be at war with those of England.
Thus Freron,1 one of their first-rate scribblers, thinks
proper to characterize all the English writers in the gross:
" Their whole merit," says he, " consists in exaggeration,
and often in extravagance: correct their pieces as yon
please, their still remains a leaven which corrupts the
whole. They sometimes discover genius, but not the
smallest share of taste: England is not a soil for the
plants of genius to thrive in." This is open enough, with
not the least adulation in the picture: but hear what a
1 A scurrilous writer against Voltaire and others, in his own ' Annexe
Litt£raire,' &c. He died in 1774.—ED.
<pb>
Frenchman of acknowledged abilities says upon the same
subject: " I am at a loss to determine in what we excel
the English, or where they excel us ; when I compare the
merits of both in any one species of literary composition,
so many reputable and pleasing writers present themselves
from either country, that my judgment rests in suspense :
I am pleased with the disquisition, without finding the
object of my enquiry." But lest you should think the
French alone are faulty in this respect, hear how an
English journalist delivers his sentiments of them : " We
are amazed," says he, " to find so many works translated
from the French, while we have such numbers neglected of
our own. In our opinion, notwithstanding their fame
throughout the rest of Europe, the French are the most
contemptible reasoners (we had almost said writers) that
can be imagined. However, nevertheless, excepting," &c.
Another English writer, Shaftesbury, if I remember, on
the contrary, says that the French authors are pleasing
and judicious, more clear, more methodical and entertain-
ing, than those of his own country.
From these opposite pictures, you perceive, that the
good authors of either country praise, and the bad revile,
each other; and yet, perhaps, you will be surprised that
indifferent writers should thus be the most apt to censure,
as they have the most to apprehend from recrimination :
you may, perhaps, imagine, that such as are possessed of
fame themselves should be most ready to declare their
opinions, since what they say might pass for decision. But
the truth happens to be, that the great are solicitous only
of raising their own reputations, while the opposite class,
alas ! are solicitous of bringing every reputation down to
a level with their own.
But let us acquit them of malice and envy. A critic is
often guided by the same motives that direct his author:
The author endeavours to persuade us, that he has written
a good book; the critic is equally solicitous to show that
he could write a better, had he thought proper. A critic
is a being possessed of all the vanity, but not the genius,
of a scholar: incapable, from his native weakness, of lift-
ing himself from the ground, he applies to contiguous
merit for support; makes the sportive sallies of another's
<pb>
imagination his serious employment; pretends to take our
feelings under his care ; teaches where to condemn, where
to lay the emphasis of praise; and may with as much
justice be called a man of taste, as the Chinese who
measures his wisdom by the length of his nails.1
If, then, a book, spirited or humorous, happens to appear
in the republic of letters, several critics are in waiting to
bid the public not to laugh at a single line of it; for
themselves had read it, and they know what is most
proper to excite laughter. Other critics contradict the
fulminations of this tribunal, call them all spiders, and
assure the public, that they ought to laugh without re-
straint. Another set are, in the meantime, quietly em-
ployed in writing notes to the book, intended to show the
particular passages to be laughed at: when these are out,
others still there are who write notes upon notes. Thus a
single new book employs not only the paper-makers, the
printers, the pressmen, the bookbinders, the hawkers, but
twenty critics, and as many compilers. In short, the body
of the learned may be compared to a Persian army, where
there are many pioneers, several sutlers, numberless ser-
vants, women and children in abundance, and but few
soldiers. Adieu.
LETTER XXI.
To the Same.
THE CHINESE GOES TO SEE A PLAY.2
THE English are as fond of seeing plays acted as the
Chinese; but there is a vast difference in the manner of
1 In his 'Chinese,' 1836, vol. i., p. 252, Sir John F. Davis says:—
" It is fashionable in both men and women to allow the nails of the left
hand to grow to an inordinate length, until they assume an appearance
very like the claws of the bradypus, as represented in Sir Charles Bell's
work on the ' Hand.' . . . The brittleness of the nail rendering it
liable to break, they have been known sometimes to protect it, when
very long, by means of thin slips of bamboo."—ED.
" The date of this paper in the Public Ledger is March 21, 1760. It
<pb>
conducting them. We play our pieces in the open air, the
English theirs under cover; we act by daylight, they by
the blaze of torches. One of our plays continues eight or
ten days successively ; an English piece seldom takes up
above four hours in the representation.1
My companion in black, with whom I am now begin-
ning to contract an intimacy, introduced me a few nights
ago to the playhouse, where we placed ourselves con-
veniently at the foot of the stage. As the curtain was
not drawn before my arrival, I had an opportunity of ob-
serving the behaviour of the spectators, and indulging
those reflections which novelty generally inspires.
The rich in general were placed in the lowest seats, and
the poor rose above them in degrees proportioned to their
poverty. The order of precedence seemed here inverted;
those who were undermost all the day, now enjoyed a
temporary eminence, and became masters of the cere-
monies. It was they who called for the music, indulging
every noisy freedom, and testifying all the insolence of
beggary in exaltation.
They who held the middle region seemed not so riotous
as those above them, nor yet so tame as those below : to
has been thought that the play criticized is Home's ' Douglas,' which was
produced in London, March 14, 1757. Goldsmith wrote an article on
this play for the Monthly Review: see the article in our vol. iv.—ED.
1 Sir John Davis says (' Chinese,' 1857, vol. ii., p. 139), that the
Chinese government give countenance to spectacles for the people, " by
permitting them to be erected in every street by subscriptions among
the inhabitants. . . . The principal public occasions of these per-
formances are certain annual festivals of a religious nature, when tem-
porary theatres, constructed, with surprising facility, of bamboos and
mats, are erected in front of their temples, or in open spaces through
their towns, the spectacle being continued for several days together.
The players, in general, come literally under our legal definition of
vagabonds, as they consist of strolling bands of ten or a dozen, whose
merit and rank is. their profession, and consequently their pay, differ
widely according to circumstances. . . . The female parts are never
performed by women, but generally by boys." He adds, concerning
Chinese plays, that:—"They have no scenical deception to assist the
story; and the odd expedients to which they are in consequence some-
times driven by want of scenery are not many degrees above Nick
Bottom's ' bush of thorns and a lanthorn,' to' disfigure or to present the
person of Moonshine,' or the man with ' some plaster, or some loam, or
some roughcast about him, to signify Wall.' "—ED.
<pb>
judge by their looks, many of them seemed strangers there
as well as myself. They were chiefly employed, during
this period of expectation, in eating oranges, reading the
story of the play, or making assignations.
Those who sat in the lowest rows, which are called the
pit, seemed to consider themselves as judges of the merit
of the poet and the performers; they were assembled
partly to be amused, and partly to show their taste;
appearing to labour under that restraint which an affec-
tation of superior discernment generally produces. My
companion, however, informed me, that not one in a
hundred of them knew even the first principles of criti-
cism ; that they assumed the right of being censors because
there was none to contradict their pretensions; and that
every man who now called himself a connoisseur, became
such to all intents and purposes.
Those who sat in the boxes appeared in the most un-
happy situation of all. The rest of the audience came
merely for their own amusement; these, rather to furnish
out a part of the entertainment themselves. I could not
avoid considering them as acting parts in dumb show—
not a courtesy or nod, that was not all the result of
art; not a look nor a smile that was not designed for
murder. Gentlemen and ladies ogled each other through
spectacles; for, my companion observed, that blindness
was of late become fashionable; all affected indifference
and ease, while their hearts at the same time burned
for conquest. Upon the whole, the lights, the music, the
ladies in their gayest dresses, the men with cheerfulness
and expectation in their looks, all conspired to make a
most agreeable picture, and to fill a heart that sympathizes
at human happiness with inexpressible serenity.
The expected time for the play to begin at last arrived ;
the curtain was drawn, and the actors came on. A
woman, who personated a queen, came in curtseying to
the audience, who clapped their hands upon her appear-
ance. Clapping of hands is, it seems, the manner of
applauding in England ; the manner is absurd, but every
country, you know, has its peculiar absurdities. I was
equally surprised, however, at the submission of the actress,
who should have considered herself as a queen, as at the
<pb>
little discernment of the audience who gave her such marks
of applause before she attempted to deserve them. Pre-
liminaries between her and the audience being thus ad-
justed, the dialogue was supported between her and a
most hopeful youth, who acted the part of her confidant.
They both appeared in extreme distress, for it seems the
queen had lost a child some fifteen years before, and still
kept its dear resemblance next her heart, while her kind
companion bore a part in her sorrows.
Her lamentations grew loud; comfort is offered, but
she detests the very sound: she bids them preach comfort
to the winds. Upon this her husband comes in, who,
seeing the queen so much afflicted, can himself hardly
refrain from tears, or avoid partaking in the soft distress.
After thus grieving through three scenes, the curtain
dropped for the first act.
" Truly," said I to my companion, " these kings and
queens are very much disturbed at no very great mis-
fortune : certain I am, were people of humbler stations to
act in this manner, they would be thought divested of
common sense." I had scarcely finished this observation,
when the curtain rose, and the king came on in a violent
passion. His wife had, it seems, refused his proffered
tenderness, had spurned his royal embrace, and he seemed
resolved not to survive her fierce disdain. After he had
thus fretted, and the queen had fretted through the second
act, the curtain was let down once more.
" Now," says my companion, " you perceive the king to
be a man of spirit; he feels at every pore: one of your
phlegmatic sons of clay would have given the queen her
own way, and let her come to herself by degrees; but the
king is for immediate tenderness, or instant death: death
and tenderness are leading passions of every modern bus-
kined hero; this moment they embrace, and the next stab,
mixing daggers and kisses in every period."
I was going to second his remarks, when my attention
was engrossed by a new object; a man came in balancing
a straw upon his nose, and the audience were clapping their
hands in all the raptures of applause. " To what pur-
pose," cried I, " does this unmeaning figure make his ap-
pearance ? is he a part of the plot ? "—" Unmeaning do
<pb>
you call him? " replied my friend in black ; " this is one
of the most important characters of the whole play; no-
thing pleases the people more than seeing a straw balanced:
there is a good deal of meaning in the straw: there is
something suited to every apprehension in the sight; and
a fellow possessed of talents like these is sure of making
his fortune."l
The third act now began with an actor who came to
inform us that he was the villain of the play, and intended
to show strange things before all was over. He was joined
by another who seemed as much disposed for mischief as
he : their intrigues continued through this whole division.
" If that be a villain," said I, " he must be a very stupid
one to tell his secrets without being asked ; such solilo-
quies of late are never admitted in China."
The noise of clapping interrupted me once more; a child
of six years old was learning to dance on the stage, which
gave the ladies and mandarines infinite satisfaction. " I
am sorry," said I, " to see the pretty creature so early
learning so very bad a trade; dancing being, I presume,
as contemptible here as in China."—" Quite the reverse,"
interrupted my companion; " dancing is a very reputable
and genteel employment here; men have a greater chance
for encouragement from the merit of their heels than their
heads. One who jumps up and flourishes his toes three
times before he comes to the ground, may have three hun-
dred a year; he who flourishes them four times, gets
four hundred ; but he who arrives at five is inestimable,
and may demand what salary he thinks proper. The
female dancers, too, are valued for this sort of jumping
and crossing; and it is a cant word amongst them, that
she deserves most who shows highest. But the fourth
act is begun; let us be attentive."
In the fourth act the queen finds her long lost child,
1 Strutt, in ki| ' Sports and Pastimes,' 1801, p. 178, tells us that:—
" In the middle of the last century there was a very celebrated balance-
master named Mattocks, who made his appearance also at the Wells
[Sadler's Wells]; among other tricks, he used to balance a straw
with great adroitness, sometimes on one hand, sometimes on the other,
and sometimes he would kick it with his foot to a considerable height
and catch it upon his nose, his chin, or his forehead."—ED.
<pb>
now grown up into a youth of smart parts and great quali-
fications ; wherefore she wisely considers that the crown
will fit his head better than that of her husband, whom
she knows to be a driveller. The king discovers her de-
sign, and here comes on the deep distress: he loves the
queen, and he loves the kingdom ; he resolves, therefore,
in order to possess both, that her son must die. The
queen exclaims at his barbarity, is frantic with rage, and
at length, overcome with sorrow, falls into a fit; upon
which the curtain drops, and the act is concluded.
"Observe the art of the poet," cries my companion.
" When the queen can say no more, she falls into a fit.
While thus her eyes are shut, while she is supported in
the arms of Abigail, what horrors do we not fancy! We
feel it in every nerve: take my word for it, that fits are
the true aposiopesis of modern tragedy."
The fifth act began, and a busy piece it was. Scenes
shifting, trumpets sounding, mobs hallooing, carpets
spreading, guards bustling from one door to another;
gods, demons, daggers, racks, and ratsbane. But whether
the king was killed, or the queen was drowned, or the son
was poisoned, I have absolutely forgotten.
When the play was over, I could not avoid observing,
that the persons of the drama appeared in as much dis-
tress in the first act as the last. " How is it possible,"
said I, " to sympathize with them through five long acts ?
Pity is but a short lived passion. I hate to hear an actor
mouthing trifles. Neither startings, strainings, nor atti-
tudes, affect me, unless there be cause: after I have been
once or twice deceived by those unmeaning alarms, my
heart sleeps in peace, probably unaffected by the prin-
cipal distress. There should be one great passion aimed
at by the actor as well as the poet; all the rest should be
subordinate, and only contribute to make that the greater;
if the actor, therefore, exclaims upon every occasion, in
the tones of despair, he attempts to move us too soon; he
anticipates the blow, he ceases to affect, though he gains
our applause."
I scarce perceived that the audience were almost all
departed; wherefore, mixing with the crowd, my com-
panion and I got into the street, where, essaying a hun-
iii. <J
<pb>
dred obstacles from coach-wheels and palanquin poles,
like birds in their flight through the branches of a forest,
after various turnings, we both at length got home in
safety. Adieu.
LETTEE XXII.
To the Same.
THE CHINESE PHILOSOPHER'S SON MADE A SLAVE
IN PERSIA.1
THE letter which came by the way of Smyrna, and which
you sent me unopened, was from my son. As I have per-
mitted you to take copies of all those I send to China, you
might have made no ceremony in opening those directed
to me. Either in joy or sorrow, my friend should partici-
pate in my feelings. It would give pleasure to see a good
man pleased at my success; it would give almost equal plea-
sure to see him sympathize at my disappointment.
Every account I receive from the East, seems to come
loaded with some new affliction. My wife and daughter
were taken from me, and yet I sustained the loss with in-
trepidity ; my son is made a slave among the barbarians,
which was the only blow that could have reached my
heart: yes, I will indulge the transports of nature for a
little, in order to show I can overcome them in the end.
True magnanimity consists not in TSEVER falling, but in RISING
every time we fall.
When our mighty Emperor had published his displea-
sure at my departure, and seized upon all that was mine,
my son was privately secreted from his resentment. Under
the protection and guardianship of Fum Hoam, the best
and the wisest of all the inhabitants of China, he was for
some time instructed in the learning of the missionaries,
and the wisdom of the East. But hearing of my adven-
tures, and incited by filial piety, he was resolved to follow
my fortunes, and share my distress.
1 Appeared in the Public Ledger March 24, 1760.—ED.
<pb>
He passed the confines of China in disguise, hired him-
self as a camel-driver to a caravan that was crossing the
deserts of Thibet, and was within one day's journey of the
river Laur, which divides that country from India, when a
body of wandering Tartars falling unexpectedly upon the
caravan, plundered it, and made those who escaped their
first fury slaves. By those he was led into the extensive
and desolate regions that border on the shores of the Aral
lake.
Here he lived by hunting; and was obliged to supply
every day, a certain proportion of the spoil to regale his
savage masters. His learning, his virtues, and even his
beauty, were qualifications that no way served to recom-
mend him; they knew no merit, but that of providing
large quantities of milk and raw flesh ; and were sensible
of no happiness but that of rioting on the undressed
meal.
Some merchants from Mesched, however, coming to
trade with the Tartars for slaves, he was sold among the
number, and led into the kingdom of Persia, where he is
now detained. He is there obliged to watch the looks of
a voluptuous and cruel master, a man fond of pleasure, yet
incapable of refinement, whom many years service in war
has taught pride, but not bravery.
That treasure which I still keep within my bosom—my
child, my all that was left to me—is now a slave. Good
Heavens!' why was this ? Why have I been introduced
into this mortal apartment, to be a spectator of my own
misfortunes, and the misfortunes of my fellow-creatures ?
Wherever I turn, what a labyrinth of doubt, error, and
disappointment appears ! Why was I brought into being ?
for what purposes made ? from whence have I come ?
whither strayed ? or to what regions am I hastening ?
Reason cannot resolve. It lends a ray to show the horrors
of my prison, but not a light to guide me to escape them.
Ye boasted revelations of the earth, how little do you aid
the inquiry !
How am I surprised at the inconsistency of the Magi!
1 This whole apostrophe seems most literally translated from Ambul-
aaohamed, the Arabian poet.—GOLDSMITH.
<pb>
Their two principles of good and evil affright me. The
Indian who bathes his visage in urine, and calls it piety,
strikes me with astonishment. The Christian who believes
in three Gods is highly absurd. The Jews, who pretend
that Deity is pleased with the effusion of blood, are not
less displeasing. I am equally surprised, that rational
beings can come from the extremities of the earth, in
order to kiss a stone, or scatter pebbles. How contrary
to reason are those ! and yet all pretend to teach me to be
happy.
Surely all men are blind and ignorant of truth. Man-
kind wanders, unknowing his way, from morning till
evening. Where shall we turn after happiness ; or is it
wisest to desist from the pursuit ?—Like reptiles in a
corner of some stupendous palace, we peep from our holes,
look about us, wonder at all we see, but are ignorant of
the great architect's design. Oh, for a revelation of Him-
self, for a plan of his universal system ! Oh, for the
reasons of our creation; or why we were created to be thus
unhappy ! If we are to experience no other felicity but
what this life affords, then are we miserable indeed ; if we
are born only to look about us, repine and die, then has
Heaven been guilty of injustice. If this life terminates
my existence, I despise the blessings of Providence, and
the wisdom of the giver; if this life be my all, let the fol-
lowing epitaph be written on the tomb of Altangi: By my
father's crimes I received this; l>y my own crimes I bequeath
it to posterity !
LETTEE XXIII.
To the Same.
THE ENGLISH SUBSCRIPTION IN FA.VOUR OF THE FBENCH
PRISONERS COMMENDED.
YET, while I sometimes lament the case of humanity, and
the depravity of human nature, there now and then appear
gleams of greatness that serve to relieve the eye oppressed
<pb>
with the hideous prospect, and resemble those cultivated
spots that are sometimes found in the midst of an Asiatic
wilderness. I see many superior excellencies among the
English, which it is not in the power of all their follies to
hide: I see virtues, which in other countries are known
only to a few, practised here by every rank of people.1
I know not whether it proceeds from their superior
opulence that the English are more charitable than the
rest of mankind; whether by being possessed of all the
conveniences of life themselves, they have more leisure to
perceive the uneasy situation of the distressed; whatever
be the motive, they are not only the most charitable of any
other nation, but most judicious in distinguishing the
properest objects of compassion.
In other countries, the giver is generally influenced by
the immediate impulse of pity; his generosity is exerted
as much to relieve his own uneasy sensations, as to comfort
the object in distress. In England, benefactions are of a
more general nature. Some men of fortune and universal
benevolence propose the proper objects; the wants and
the merits of the petitioners are canvassed by the people;
neither passion nor pity find a place in the cool discussion;
and charity is then only exerted when it has received the
approbation of reason.
A late instance of this finely directed benevolence forces
itself so strongly on my imagination, that2 it in a manner
reconciles me to pleasure, and once more makes me the
universal friend of man.2
The English and French have not only political reasons
to induce them to mutual hatred, but often the more pre-
vailing motive of private interest to widen the breach. A
war between other countries is carried on collectively;
1 This Letter, as it appeared in the Public Ledger, March 25, 1760,
opened as follows :—
" Think me not, my friend, one of those censorious moralists who are
resolved to be pleased at nothing, who behold every object on the gloomy
side, and often make faults rather than lose an opportunity of reproof.
I see many superior excellencies," &c.—ED.
2-2 In place of these words the Public Ledger version has:—" though
mentioned before, I must beg leave once more to repeat it." The
previous mention occurred on Feb. 18, 1760, in the Letter which is now
No. XI.: see p. 42.—ED.
<pb>
army fights against army, and a man's own private resent-
ment is lost in that of the community. But in England
and France, the individuals of each country plunder each
other at sea without redress, and consequently feel that
animosity against each other which passengers do at a
robber. They have for some time carried on an expensive
war; and several captives have been taken on both sides.
Those made prisoners by the French have been used with
cruelty, and guarded with unnecessary caution. Those
taken by the English, being much more numerous, were
confined in the ordinary manner, and not being released
by their countrymen, began to feel all those inconveniences
which arise from want of covering and long confinement.
Their countrymen were informed of their deplorable situa-
tion ; but they, more intent on annoying their enemies than
relieving their friends, refused the least assistance. The
English now saw thousands of their fellow-creatures
starving in every prison, forsaken by those whose duty it
was to protect them, labouring with disease, and without
clothes to keep off the severity of the season. National
benevolence prevailed over national animosity; their
prisoners were indeed enemies, but they were enemies in
distress; they ceased to be hateful when they no longer
continued to be formidable: forgetting, therefore, their
national hatred, the men who were brave enough to con-
quer, were generous enough to forgive; and they whom all
the world seemed to have disclaimed, at last found pity
and redress from those they attempted to subdue. A sub-
scription was opened, ample charities collected, proper
necessaries procured, and the poor gay sons of a merry
nation were once more taught to resume their former gaiety.
When I cast my eye over the list of those who contributed
on this occasion, I find the names almost entirely English ;
scarcely one foreigner appears among the number. It was
for Englishmen alone to be capable of such exalted virtue.
I own I cannot look over this catalogue of good men and
philosophers without thinking better of myself, because it
makes me entertain a more favourable opinion of mankind.
I am particularly struck with one who writes these words
upon the paper that enclosed his benefaction: " The mite
of an Englishman, a citizen of the world, to Frenchmen,
<pb>
prisoners of war, and naked."l I only wish that he may
find as much pleasure from his virtues, as I have done in
reflecting upon them; that alone will amply reward him.
Such a one, my friend, is an honour to human nature; he
makes no private distinctions of party; all that are
stamped with the divine image of their Creator are friends
to him: he is a native of the world; and the Emperor of
China may be proud that he has such a countryman.
To rejoice at the destruction of our enemies is a foible
grafted upon human nature, and we must be permitted to
indulge it: the true way of atoning for such an ill-founded
pleasure, is thus to turn our triumph into an act of bene-
volence, and to testify our own joy by endeavouring to
banish anxiety from others.
Hamti,2 the best and wisest Emperor that ever filled the
throne, after having gained three signal victories over the
Tartars, who had invaded his dominions, returned to
Nankin, in order to enjoy the glory of his conquest.
After he had rested for some days, the people, who are
naturally fond of processions, impatiently expected the
triumphant entry, which emperors upon such occasions
were accustomed to make. Their murmurs came to the
Emperor's ear. He loved his people, and was willing to
do all in his power to satisfy their just desires. He there-
fore assured them, that he intended, upon the next feast
of the Lanterns,3 to exhibit one of the most glorious
triumphs that had ever been seen in China.
The people were in raptures at his condescension; and,
on the appointed day, assembled at the gates of the palace
with the most eager expectations. Here they waited for
some time, without seeing any of those preparations which
usually precede a pageant. The lantern, with ten thousand
tapers, was not yet brought forth; the fireworks, which
usually covered the city walls, were not yet lighted: the
1 In the " finely directed benevolence," and the signature, of this
anonymous "Englishman" we have, perhaps, Goldsmith's incentive for
entitling these letters the ' Citizen of the World.' See, however, p. 74.
—En.
2 In the Public Ledger the name is Haneti.—ED.
3 The great popular festival of the Chinese, the feast of the first full
moon of the new year : vide Sir John Davis, 1836, vol. i., p. 287.—ED.
<pb>
people once more began to murmur at this delay, when, in
the midst of their impatience, the palace-gates flew open,
and the Emperor himself appeared, not in splendour or
magnificence, but in an ordinary habit, followed by the
blind, the maimed, and the strangers of the city, all in new
clothes, and each carrying in his hand money enough to
supply his necessities for the year. The people were at
first amazed, but soon perceived the wisdom of their king,
'who taught them, that to make one man happy, was more
truly great, than having ten thousand captives groaning at
the wheels of his chariot. Adieu.
LETTEE XXIV.
To the Same.
THE VENDERS OF QUACK MEDICINES AND NOSTRUMS
RIDICULED.1
WHATEVER may be the merits of the English in other
sciences, they seem peculiarly excellent in the art of heal-
ing. There is scarcely a disorder incident to humanity,
against which they are not possessed with a most infallible
antidote. The professors of other arts confess the in-
evitable intricacy of things; talk with doubt, and decide
with hesitation: but doubting is entirely unknown in
medicine. The advertising professors here delight in
cases of difficulty. Be the disorder never so desperate or
radical, you will find numbers in every street, who, by
levelling a pill at the part affected, promise a certain
cure, without loss of time, knowledge of a bedfellow, or
hindrance of business.
When I consider the assiduity of this profession, their
benevolence amazes me. They not only in general give
1 In the Public Ledger of March 27, 1760. The subject of this letter
is continued in Letter LXV1II. The first two paragraphs, with most of
Letter LXVIII., constitute Essay XX., as first published by Gold-
smith in his ' Essays,' 1765. The heading in the ' Essays' has usually
been " On Quack Doctors."—ED.
<pb>
their medicines for half value, but use the most persuasive
remonstrances to induce the sick to come and be cured.
Sure, there must be something strangely obstinate in an
English patient, who refuses so much health upon such
easy terms ! Does he take a pride in being bloated with
a dropsy ? does he find pleasure in the alternations of an
intermittent fever ? or feel as much satisfaction in nursing
up his gout as he found pleasure in acquiring it ? He
must; otherwise he would not reject such repeated assu-
rances of instant relief. What can be more convincing
than the manner in which the sick are invited to be well ?
The doctor first begs the most earnest attention of the
public to what he is going to propose: he solemnly affirms
the pill was never found to want success; he produces a
list of those who have been rescued from the grave by
taking it. Yet, notwithstanding all this, there are many
here who now and then think proper to be sick. Only
sick, did I say ? there are some who even think proper to
die! Yes, by the head of Confucius ! they die; though
they might have purchased the health-restoring specific
for half-a-crown at every corner.
I am amazed, my dear Fum Hoam, that these doctors,
who know what an obstinate set of people they have to deal
with, have never thought of attempting to revive the dead.
When the living are found to reject their prescriptions,
they ought in conscience to apply to the dead, from whom
they can expect no such mortifying repulses. They would
find in the dead the most complying patients imaginable;
and what gratitude might they not expect from the
patient'sl son, now no longer an heir, and hisl wife, now no
longer a widow!
Think not, my friend, that there is any thing chimerical
in such an attempt; they already perform cures equally
strange. What can be more truly astonishing, than to see
old age restored to youth, and vigour to the most feeble
constitutions ? Yet this is performed here every day: a
simple electuary effects these wonders, even without the
bungling ceremonies of having the patient boiled up in a
kettle, or ground down in a mill.
'-l Not in the Public Ledger.—ED.
'
<pb>
Few physicians here go through the ordinary courses of
education, but receive all their knowledge of medicine by
immediate inspiration from heaven. Some are thus in-
spired even in the womb ; and, what is very remarkable,
understand their profession as well at three years old, as
at threescore. Others have spent a great part of their
lives unconscious of any latent excellence, till a bank-
ruptcy, or a residence in jail, has called their miraculous
powers into exertion. And others still there are indebted
to their superlative ignorance alone for success. The more
ignorant the practitioner, the less capable is he thought of
deceiving. The people here judge as they do in the East,
where it is thought absolutely requisite that a man should
be an idiot before he pretend to be either a conjurorl or a
doctor.
When a physician by inspiration is sent for, he never
perplexes the patient by previous examination; he asks
very few questions, and those only for form sake. He
knows every disorder by intuition. He administers the
pill or drop for every distemper; nor is more inquisitive
than the farrier while he drenches a horse. If the patient
lives, then has he one more to add to the surviving list;
if he dies, then it may be justly said of the patient's dis-
order, that, as it was not cured, the disorder was incurable.
LETTEE XXV.
To the Same.
THE NATttRAL RISE AND DECLINE OF KINGDOMS, EXEM-
PLIFIED IN THE HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF LAO.
I WAS some days ago in company with a politician, who
very pathetically declaimed upon the miserable situation
of his country. He assured me, that the whole political
machine was moving in a wrong track, and that scarce
1 The word in the Ledger is " dervise."—ED.
<pb>
even abilities like his own could ever set it right again.
" What have we," said he, " to do with the wars on the
Continent ? we are a commercial nation; we have only to
cultivate commerce, like our neighbours the Dutch ; it is
our business to increase trade by settling new colonies;
riches are the strength of a nation; and for the rest, our
ships, our ships alone, will protect us." I found it vain
to oppose my feeble arguments to those of a man who
thought himself wise enough to direct even the ministry.
I fancied, however, that I saw with more certainty, because
I reasoned without prejudice: I therefore begged leave,
instead of argument, to relate a short history. He gave
me a smile at once of condescension and contempt; and I
proceeded as follows, to describe—THE RISE AND DECLEN-
SION OF THE KINGDOM OF LAO.
Northward of China, and in one of the doublings of the
great wall, the fruitful province of Lao enjoyed its liberty
and a peculiar government of its own. As the inhabitants
were on all sides surrounded by the wall, they feared no
sudden invasion from the Tartars ; and being each
possessed of property, they were zealous in its defence.
The natural consequence of security and affluence in any
country, is a love of pleasure. When the wants of nature
are supplied, we seek after the conveniences; when
possessed of these, we desire the luxuries of life ; and
when every luxury is provided, it is then ambition takes
up the man, and leaves him still something to wish for.
The inhabitants of the country, from primitive simplicity,
soon began to aim at elegance, and from elegance pro-
ceeded to refinement. It was now found absolutely re-
quisite, for the good of the state, that the people should
be divided. Formerly, the same hand that was employed
in tilling the ground, or in dressing up the manufactures,
was also, in time of need, a soldier; but the custom was
now changed; for it was perceived, that a man bred up
from childhood to the arts of either peace or war, became
more eminent by this means in his respective profession.
The inhabitants were, therefore, now distinguished into
artisans and soldiers ; and while those improved the luxu-
ries of life, these watched for the security of the people.
A country possessed of freedom has always two sorts of
<pb>
enemies to fear,—foreign foes, who attack its existence
from without, and internal miscreants, who betray its
liberties within. The inhabitants of Lao were to guard
against both. A country of artisans were most likely to
preserve internal liberty; and a nation of soldiers were
fittest to repel a foreign invasion. Hence naturally arose
a division of opinion between the artisans and soldiers of
the kingdom. The artisans, ever complaining that freedom
was threatened byan armed internal force, were for disband-
ing the soldiers, and insisted that their walls, their walls
alone, were sufficient to repel the most formidable invasion :
the warriors, on the contrary, represented the power of the
neighbouring kings, the combinations formed against their
state, and the weakness of the wall which every earth-
quake might overturn. While this altercation continued,
the kingdom might be justly said to enjoy its greatest
share of vigour: every order in the state, by being watchful
over each other, contributed to diffuse happiness equally,
and balanced the state. The arts of peace flourished, nor
were those of war neglected: the neighbouring powers,
who had nothing to apprehend from the ambition of men
whom they only saw solicitous, not for riches, but freedom,
were contented to traffic with them : they sent their goods
to be manufactured in Lao, and paid a large price for them
upon their return.
By these means this people at length became moderately
rich, and their opulence naturally invited the invader: a
Tartar prince led an immense army against them, and
they as bravely stood up in their own defence; they were
still inspired with a love of their country; they fought
the barbarous enemy with fortitude, and gained a complete
victory.
From this mpment, which they regarded as the comple-
tion of their glory, historians date their downfall. They
had risen in strength by a love of their country, and fell
by indulging ambition. The country possessed by the in-
vading Tartars, seemed to them a prize that would not
only render them more formidable for the future, but
which would increase their opulence for the present; it
was unanimously resolved, therefore, both by soldiers
and artisans, that those desolate regions should be
<pb>
peopled by colonies from Lao. When a trading nation
begins to act the conqueror, it is then perfectly undone.
It subsists in some measure by the support of its neigh-
bours : while they continue to regard it without envy or
apprehension, trade may flourish ; but when once it pre-
sumes to assert as its right what is only enjoyed as a
favour, each country reclaims that part of commerce which
it has power to take back, and turns it into some other
channel more honourable, though perhaps less convenient.
Every neighbour now began to regard with jealous eyes
this ambitious commonwealth, and forbade their subjects
any future intercourse with them. The inhabitants of Lao,
however, still pursued the same ambitious maxims: it was
from their colonies alone they expected riches ; and riches,
said they, are strength, and strength is security. Number-
less were the migrations of the desperate and enterprising
of this country, to people the desolate dominions lately
possessed by the Tartar. Between these colonies and the
mother country, a very advantageous traffic was at first
carried on: the republic sent their colonies large quanti-
ties of the manufactures of the country, and they in return
provided the republic with an equivalent in ivory and gin-
seng.1 By this means the inhabitants became immensely
rich, and this produced an equal degree of voluptuousness;
for men who have much money will always find some
fantastical modes of enjoyment. How shall I mark the
steps by which they declined ? Every colony in process of
time spreads over the whole country where it first was
planted. As it grows more populous, it becomes more
polite; and those manufactures for which it was in the
beginning obliged to others, it learns to dress up itself.
Such was the case with the colonies of Lao : they, in less
than a century, became a powerful and a polite people, and
the more polite they grew, the less advantageous was the
commerce which still subsisted between them and others.
By this means the mother country, being abridged in its
commerce, grew poorer, but not less luxurious. Their
former wealth had introduced luxury; and wherever luxury
 1 Ginseng. According to Sir J. Hill's ' Materia Medica,' 1751, this
root of a plant was then but lately introduced to England from China,
and was valued as a stomachic.—ED.
'
<pb>
once fixes, no art can either lessen or remove it. Their
commerce with their neighbours was totally destroyed, and
that with their colonies was every day naturally and neces-
sarily declining; they still, however, preserved the inso-
lence of wealth, without a power to support it, and per-
severed in being luxurious, while contemptible from
poverty. In short, the state resembled one of those bodies
bloated with disease, whose bulk is only a symptom of its
wretchedness.
Their former opulence only rendered them more im-
potent, as those individuals who are reduced from riches
to poverty are, of all men, the most unfortunate and help-
less. They had imagined, because their colonies tended
to make them rich upon the first acquisition, they would
still continue to do so; they now found, however, that on
themselves alone they should have depended for support;
that colonies ever afforded but temporary affluence; and
when cultivated and polite, are no longer useful. From
such a concurrence of circumstances they soon became con-
temptible. The Emperor Honti1 invaded them with a
powerful army. Historians do not say whether their
colonies were too remote to lend assistance, or else were
desirous of shaking off their dependence ; but certain it is,
they scarce made any resistance: their walls were now
found but a weak defence, and they at length were obliged
to acknowledge subjection to the empire of China.
Happy, very happy might they have been, had they
known when to bound their riches and their glory; had
they known that extending empire is often diminishing
power; that countries are ever strongest which are inter-
nally powerful; that colonies, by draining away the brave
and enterprising, leave the country in the hands of the
timid and avaricious; that walls give little protection,
unless manned with resolution; that too much commerce
may injure a nation as well as too little; and that there is
a wide difference between a conquering and a flourishing
empire.2 Adieu.
1 The Public Ledger has " Ham-ti."—ED.
2 Compare the ' Deserted Village,' 11. 265, &c., published ten years
later.—ED.
<pb>
LETTER XXVI.1
To the Same.
THE CHARACTER OF THE MAN IN BLACK ; WITH SOME
INSTANCES OF HIS INCONSISTENT CONDUCT.
THOUGH fond of many acquaintances, I desire an inti-
macy only with a few. The man in black,2 whom I have
often mentioned, is one whose friendship I could wish to
acquire, because he possesses my esteem. His manners,
it is true, are tinctured with some strange inconsistencies,
and he may be justly termed a humourist in a nation of
humourists. Though he is generous even to profusion, he
affects to be thought a prodigy of parsimony and prudence;
though his conversation be replete with the most sordid
and selfish maxims, his heart is dilated with the most un-
bounded love. I have known him profess himself a man-
hater, while his cheek was glowing with compassion; and,
while his looks were softened into pity, I have heard him
use the language of the most unbounded ill-nature. Some
affect humanity and tenderness, others boast of having
such dispositions from nature; but he is the only man I
ever knew who seemed ashamed of his natural benevolence.
He takes as much pains to hide his feelings, as any hypo-
crite would to conceal his indifference ; but on every un-
guarded moment the mask drops off, and reveals him to
the most superficial observer.3
1 Erroneously numbered in the earliest and some other editions XXV.
From this point, consequently, the numbers of the letters in the early
editions differ from the numbers given in the present edition; and sf ill
further deviations occur later on, consequent upon three similar mis-
numberings in the early editions. The last letter of the early editions
is numbered CIX., yet there are CXXIII. letters given, as in the pre-
sent edition.—ED.
2 See Letters XIII. and XX., ante. This character, which in many
points bears a striking resemblance to that of Goldsmith himself, was
intended for his father, the Rev. Charles Goldsmith.—B. See note at
the end of this Letter; also ' Life' in vol. i., p. 3.—ED.
3 Compare the passage " I have often affected bluntness," &c., in
Goldsmith's letter to his cousin Mrs. Lawder, 1758, at p. 439 of our
vol. i.—ED.
<pb>
In one of our late excursions into the country, happen-
ing to discourse upon the provision that was made for the
poor in England, he seemed amazed how any of his
countrymen could be so foolishly weak as to relieve occa-
sional objects of charity, when the laws had made such
ample provision for their support. " In every parish-
house," says he, "the poor are supplied with food, clothes,
fire, and a bed to lie on; they want no more, I desire no
more myself; yet still they seem discontented. I am sur-
prised at the inactivity of our magistrates, in not taking
up such vagrants, who are only a weight upon the indus-
trious ; I am surprised that the people are found to relieve
them, when they must be at the same time sensible that it,
in some measure, encourages idleness, extravagance, and
imposture. Were I to advise any man for whom I had the
least regard, I would caution him by all means not to be
imposed upon by their false pretences: let me assure you,
Sir, they are impostors, every one of them, and rather
merit a prison than relief."
He was proceeding in this strain, earnestly to dissuade
me from an imprudence of which I am seldom guilty, when
an old man, who still had about him the remnants of
tattered finery, implored our compassion. He assured us
that he was no common beggar, but forced into the shame-
ful profession, to support a dying wife, and five hungry
children. Being prepossessed against such falsehoods, his
story had not the least influence upon me; but it was quite
otherwise with the man in black; I could see it visibly
operate upon his countenance, and effectually interrupt his
harangue. I could easily perceive, that his heart burned
to relieve the five starving children, but he seemed ashamed
to discover his weakness to me. While he thus hesitated
between compassion and pride, I pretended to look another
way, and he seized this opportunity of giving the poor
petitioner a piece of silver, bidding him at the same time,
in order that I should hear,1 go work for his bread, and
not tease passengers with such impertinent falsehoods for
the future.
As he had fancied himself quite unperceived, he con-
1 This is as in the first edition. The third edition and Percy's edition
have " not hear." Hear of course seems the proper reading.—ED.
<pb>
tinued, as we proceeded, to rail against beggars with as
much animosity as before; he threw in some episodes on
his own amazing prudence and economy, with his profound
skill in discovering impostors; he explained the manner in
which he would deal with beggars were he a magistrate,
hinted at enlarging some of the prisons for their reception,
and told two stories of ladies that were robbed by beggar-
men. He was beginning a third to the same purpose, when
a sailor with a wooden leg once more crossed our walks,
desiring our pity, and blessing our limbs. I was for going
on without taking any notice, but my friend looking wish-
fully upon the poor petitioner, bid me stop, and he would
show me with how much ease he could at any time detect
an impostor.1
He now, therefore, assumed a look of importance, and in
an angry tone began to examine the sailor, demanding in
what engagement he was thus disabled and rendered unfit
for service. The sailor replied, in a tone as angrily as he,
that he had been an officer on board a private ship of war,
and that he had lost his leg abroad, in defence of those
who did nothing at home. At this reply, all my friend's
importance vanished in a moment; he had not a single
question more to ask ; he now only studied what method
he should take to relieve him unobserved. He had, how-
ever, no easy part to act, as he was obliged to preserve the
appearance of ill-nature before me, and yet relieve himself
by relieving the sailor. Casting, therefore, a furious look
upon some bundles of chips which the fellow carried in a
string at his back, my friend demanded how he sold his
matches; but, not waiting for a reply, desired, in a surly
tone, to have a shilling's worth. The sailor seemed at first
surprised at his demand, but soon recollected himself, and
presenting his whole bundle, " Here, master," says he,
" take all my cargo, and a blessing into the bargain."
It is impossible to describe with what an air of triumph
1 Compare with the author's letter to his brother Henry (vol. i.
p. 448), where he says he has contracted the " suspicious manner" of the
" cool, designing beings" into whose association he has been forced, a
passage which his biographer, Percy, has annotated by—" This is all
gratis dictum, for there never was a character so unsuspicious and so
unguarded as the writer's."—ED.
III. H
<pb>
my friend marched off with his new purchase: he assured
me, that he was firmly of opinion that those fellows must
have stolen their goods, who could thus afford to sell them
for half value. He informed me of several different uses
to which those chips might be applied; he expatiated
largely upon the savings that would result from lighting
candles with a match, instead of thrusting them into the
fire. He averred, that he would as soon have parted with
a tooth as his money to those vagabonds, unless for some
valuable consideration. I cannot tell how long this pane-
gyric upon frugality and matches might have continued,
had not his attention been called off by another object
more distressful than either of the former. A woman in
rags, with one child in her arms, and another on her back,
was attempting to sing ballads, but with such a mournful
voice, that it was difficult to determine whether she was
singing or crying. A wretch, who in the deepest distress
still aimed at good-humour, was an object my friend was
by no means capable of withstanding: his vivacity and his
discourse were instantly interrupted ; upon this occasion,
his very dissimulation had forsaken him. Even in my
presence he immediately applied his hands to his pockets,
in order to relieve her; but guess his confusion when he
found he had already given away all the money he carried
about him to former objects. The misery painted in the
woman's visage was not half so strongly expressed as the
agony in his. He continued to search for some time, but
to no purpose, till, at length recollecting himself, with a
face of ineffable good-nature, as he had no money, he put
into her hands his shilling's worth of matches.1
1 The following anecdote, reported in Prior's 'Life' (vol. i. p. 95),
as told by Goldsmith's cousin Mills, tends more towards proving the
likeness of the " man in black" to Goldsmith himself than to his father.
When the cousins were together at Trinity College, Dublin, so goes
this story, they often took breakfast together. On being summoned to
the repast upon one occasion, Goldsmith declared from within his bed-
room " his inability to rise, and that to enable him to do so they must
come to his assistance by forcing open the door. This was accordingly
done by Mills; who found his cousin nut on his bed, but literally in it,
having ripped part of the ticking and immersed himself in the feathers,
from which situation, as alleged, he found difficulty in extricating him-
self. By his own account in explanation of this strange scene, after the
merriment which it occasioned had subsided, it appeared that while
<pb>
LETTER XXVII.
To the Same.
THE HISTORY OF THE MAN IN BLACK.1
As there appeared something reluctantly good in the
character of my companion, I must own it surprised me
what could be his motives for thus concealing virtues which
others take such pains to display. I was unable to repress
my desire of knowing the history of a man who thus seemed
to act under continual restraint, and whose benevolence
was rather the effect of appetite2 than reason.
It was not, however, till after repeated solicitations he
thought proper to gratify my curiosity. " If you are
fond," says he, " of hearing hairbreadth 'scapes, my his-
tory must certainly please ; for I have been for twenty
years upon the very verge of starving, without ever being
starved.
" My father, the younger son of a good family, was pos-
sessed of a small living in the church.3 His education was
above his fortune, and his generosity greater than his
education. Poor as he was, he had his flatterers still
poorer than himself; for every dinner he gave them, they
returned an equivalent in praise ; and this was all he
wanted. The same ambition that actuates a monarch at
the head of an army, influenced my father at the head of
his table. He told the story of the ivy-tree, and that was
strolling in the suburbs the preceding evening, he met a poor woman
with five children, who told a pitiful story of her husband being in the
hospital, and herself and offspring destitute of food and shelter for the
night, and that, being from the country, they knew no person to
whom," &c. So appealed to, it seems Goldsmith, having no money
with him, brought the poor woman to the college gate, sent out to her
his blankets and part of his clothes, and, finding himself cold in the
night, had to bestow himself as above narrated.—ED.
° The date of this Letter in the Public Ledger is April 9, 1760.—ED.
2 The Public Ledger has " nature " instead of " appetite."—ED.
3 From this little sketch, it might have been supposed that the Man
in Black's father, not himself, was the character meant for the Rev.
Charles Goldsmith, were it not that all our author's biographers agree
in asserting the contrary.—B.
'
<pb>
laughed at; he repeated the jest of the two scholars and
one pair of breeches, and the company laughed at that;
but the story of Taffy in the sedan-chair, was sure to set
the table in a roar. Thus his pleasure increased in pro-
portion to the pleasure he gave; he loved all the world,
and he fancied all the world loved him.1
" As his fortune was but small, he lived up to the very
extent of it; he had no intentions of leaving his children
money, for that was dross; he was resolved they should
have learning; for learning, he used to observe, was better
than silver or gold. For this purpose, he undertook to
instruct us himself; and took as much pains to form our
morals, as to improve our understanding. We were told,
that universal benevolence was what first cemented society;2
we were taught to consider all the wants of mankind as
our own; to regard the ' human face divine' with affection
and esteem ; he wound us up to be mere machines of pity,
and rendered us incapable of withstanding the slightest
impulse made either by real or fictitious distress: in a
word, we were perfectly instructed in the art of giving
away thousands, before we were taught the more necessary
qualifications of getting a farthing.
" I cannot avoid imagining, that thus refined by his les-
sons out of all my suspicion, and divested of even all the
little cunning which nature had given me, I resembled,
upon my first entrance into the busy and insidious world,
one of those gladiators who were exposed without armour
in the amphitheatre at Rome. My father, however, who
had only seen the world on one side, seemed to triumph
in my superior discernment; though my whole stock of
wisdom consisted in being able to talk like himself upon
subjects that once were useful, because they were then
topics of the busy world, but that now were utterly
useless, because connected with the busy world no longer.
" The first opportunity he had of finding his expectations
disappointed, was in the very middling figure I made in
the university; he had flattered himself that he should
1 The Public Ledger has " and all the world pretended to love him."
—Bo.
2 The Public Ledger reads " universal benevolence was the first law
of nature."—ED.
<pb>
soon see me rising into the foremost rank in literary repu-
tation, but was mortified to find me utterly unnoticed and
unknown. His disappointment might have been partly as-
cribed to his having overrated my talents, and partly to
my dislike of mathematical reasonings, at a time when my
imagination and memory, yet unsatisfied, were more eager
after new objects, than desirous of reasoning upon those
I knew.1 This did not, however, please my tutor, who
observed, indeed, that I was a little dull; but at the same
time allowed, that I seemed to be very good-natured, and
had no harm in me.
" After I had resided at college seven years, my father
died, and left me—his blessing. Thus shoved from shore
without ill-nature to protect, or cunning to guide, or proper
stores to subsist me in so dangerous a voyage, I was
obliged to embark in the wide world at twenty-two. But,
in order to settle in life, my friends advised, (for they
always advise when they begin to despise us,) they advised
me, I say, to go into orders.
" To be obliged to wear a long wig, when I liked a short
one, or a black coat, when I generally dressed in brown, I
thought was such a restraint upon my liberty, that I abso-
lutely rejected the proposal. A priest in England is not
the same mortified creature with a bonze in China. With
us, not he that fasts best, but eats best, is reckoned the
best liver; yet I rejected a life of luxury, indolence, and
ease, from no other consideration but that boyish one of
dress.2 So that my friends were now perfectly satisfied I
was undone ; and yet they thought it a pity for one who
had not the least harm in him, and was so very good-
natured.
1 Compare with the account of Goldsmith's own school failures (' Life,'
pp. 5-7, vol. i.), and with the evidence of his dislike of mathematics, at
p. 61, vol. i. (Prof. De Morgan's remarks), and passages in the opening
of his ' Life of Parnell' (vol. iv.), the essay ' On Taste' (vol. i. p. 326),
&c.—ED.
2 Taking the account to be more or less tinged with the author's
own experiences, this may be an allusion to his rejection by the Bishop
of Elphin when he was proposed for holy orders (see ' Life,' p. 7). Dr.
Strean asserted that Goldsmith was sent back by the Bishop because he
presented himself in scarlet breeches; vide Mangin's ' Essay,' p. 150.—
ED.
<pb>
" Poverty naturally begets dependence, and I was ad-
mitted as flatterer to a great man. At first, I was sur-
prised that the situation of a flatterer at a great man's
table could be thought disagreeable: there was no great
trouble in listening attentively when his lordship spoke,
and laughing when he looked round for applause. This
even good manners might have obliged me to perform. I
found, however, too soon, that his lordship was a greater
dunce than myself; and from that very moment flattery
was at an end. I now rather aimed at setting him right,
than at receiving his absurdities with submission. To
flatter those we do not know is an easy task ; but to flatter
our intimate acquaintances, all whose foibles are strongly
in our eye, is drudgery insupportable. Every time I now
opened my lips in praise, my falsehood went to my con-
science. : his lordship soon perceived me to be very unfit
for service ; I was therefore discharged ; my patron at the
same time being graciously pleased to observe, that he be-
lieved I was tolerably good-natured, and had not the least
harm in me.1
" Disappointed in ambition, I had recourse to love. A
young lady, who lived with her aunt, and was possessed
of a pretty fortune in her own disposal, had given me, as
I fancied, some reason to expect success. The symptoms
by which I was guided were striking. She had always
laughed with me at her awkward acquaintance, and at her
aunt among the number; she always observed, that a man
of sense would make a better husband than a fool, and I
as constantly applied the observation in my own favour.
She continually talked, in my company, of friendship and
the beauties of the mind, and spoke of Mr. Shrimp my
rival's high-heeled shoes with detestation. These were
circumstances which I thought strongly in my favour ; so,
after resolving, and re-resolving, I had courage enough to
tell her my mind. Miss heard my proposal with serenity,
seeming at the same time to study the figures of her fan.
Out at last it came : There was but one small objection to
complete our happiness, which was no more than that
she was married three months before to Mr. Shrimp,
1 Perhaps this is an allusion to Goldsmith's short connexion with the
Duke of Hamilton; see Letters, p. 425, vol. i.—ED.
<pb>
with high-heeled shoes! By way of consolation, however,
she observed, that, though I was disappointed in her, my
addresses to her aunt would probably kindle her into sen-
sibility ; as the old lady always allowed me to be very
good-natured, and not to have the least share of harm in me.
" Yet still I had friends, numerous friends, and to them
I was resolved to apply. O friendship ! thou fond soother
of the human breast, to thee we fly in every calamity; to
thee the wretched seek for succour ; on thee the care-tired
son of misery fondly relies ; from thy kind assistance the
unfortunate always hopes relief, and may be ever sure of
—disappointment! My first application was to a city
scrivener, who had frequently offered to lend me money,
when he knew I did not want it. I informed him, that
now was the time to put his friendship to the test; that I
wanted to borrow a couple of hundreds for a certain occa-
sion, and was resolved to take it up from him. ' And pray,
Sir,' cried my friend, ' do you want all this money ? '—' In-
deed, I never wanted it more,' returned I. ' I am sorry
for that,' cries the scrivener, ' with all my heart; for they
who want money when they come to borrow, will always
want money when they should come to pay.''
" From him I flew with indignation, to one of the best
friends I had in the world, and made the same request.
' Indeed, Mr. Drybone,' cries my friend,' I always thought
it would come to this. You know, Sir, I would not advise
you but for your own good ; but your conduct has hitherto
been ridiculous in the highest degree, and some of your
acquaintance always thought you a very silly fellow. Let
me see—you want two hundred pounds. Do you only want
two hundred, Sir, exactly ? '—' To confess a truth,' returned
I, ' I shall want three hundred; but then I have another
friend, from whom I can borrow the rest.'—' Why, then,'
replied my friend, ' if you would take my advice, (and you
know I should not presume to advise you but for your own
good), I would recommend it to you to borrow the whole
sum from that other friend, and then one note will serve
for all, you know.' 2
1 Compare with the story of Dick Wildgoose (' Bee' essay on ' Hap-
piness,' vol. ii.) and with other passages.—ED.
2 The two paragraphs ending here seem to have been written specially
<pb>
" Poverty now began to come fast upon me ; yet instead
of growing more provident or cautious as I grew poor, I
became every day more indolent and simple. A friend
was arrested for fifty pounds; I was unable to extricate
him, except by becoming his bail. When at liberty, he
fled from his creditors, and left me to take his place. In
prison I expected greater satisfactions than I had enjoyed
at large. I hoped to converse with men in this new world,
simple and believing like myself; but I found them as
cunning and as cautious as those in the world I had left
behind. They spunged up my money while it lasted, bor-
rowed my coals and never paid for them, and cheated me
when I played at cribbage. All this was done because they
believed me to be very good-natured, and knew that I had
no harm in me.
" Upon my first entrance into this mansion, which is to
some the abode of despair, I felt no sensations different
from those I experienced abroad. I was now on one side
the door, and those who were unconfined were on the other:
this was all the difference between us. At first, indeed, I
felt some uneasiness, in considering how I should be able
to provide this week for the wants of the week ensuing;
but, after some time, if I found myself sure of eating one
day, I never troubled my head how I was to be supplied
another. I seized every precarious meal with the utmost
good-humour; indulged no rants of spleen at my situa-
tion ; never called down heaven and all the stars to behold
me dining upon a halfpenny worth of radishes ; my very
companions were taught to believe that I liked salad better
than mutton. I contented myself with thinking, that all
my life I should either eat white bread or brown; consi-
dered that all that happened was best; laughed when I
was not in pain, took the world as it went, and read Tacitus
often, for want of more books and company.
" How long I might have continued in this torpid state
of simplicity I cannot tell, had I not been roused by seeing
an old acquaintance, whom I knew to be a prudent block-
head, preferred to a place in the government. I now found
that I had pursued a wrong track, and that the true way
for the 'Citizen' issue. They are not in the Public Ledger version.—
ED.
<pb>
of being able to relieve others, was first to aim at indepen-
dence myself. My immediate care, therefore, was to leave
my present habitation, and make an entire reformation in
my conduct and behaviour. For a free, open, undesigning
deportment, I put on that of closeness, prudence, and
economy. One of the most heroic actions I ever performed,
and for which I shall praise myself as long as I live, was
the refusing half-a-crown to an old acquaintance, at the
time when he wanted it, and I had it to spare:' for this
alone I deserve to be decreed an ovation.1
" I now therefore pursued a course of uninterrupted
frugality, seldom wanted a dinner, and was consequently
invited to twenty. I soon began to get the character of a
saving hunks that had money, and insensibly grew into
esteem. Neighbours have asked my advice in the disposal
of their daughters ; and I have always taken care not to
give any. I have contracted a friendship with an alder-
man, only by observing, that if we take a farthing from a
thousand pounds, it will be a thousand pounds no longer.2
I have been invited to a pawnbroker's table, by pretending
to hate gravy ;3 and am now actually upon treaty of mar-
riage with a rich widow, for only having observed that the
bread was rising. If ever I am asked a question, whether
I know it or not, instead of answering, I only smile and
look wise. If a charity is proposed, I go about with the
hat, but put nothing in myself. If a wretch solicits my
pity, I observe that the world is filled with impostors, and
take a certain method of not being deceived, by never re-
lieving. In short, I now find the truest way of finding
esteem, even from the indigent, is—to give away nothing,
and thus have much in our power to give."
'-' This clause did not appear in the Ledger version.—ED.
2 See the " maxims of frugality," &c., in the author's letters to Mrs.
Lawder, vol. i. p. 440.—ED.
3 See ' Specimen of a Magazine in Miniature.'' Essays,' p. 261, vol. i.
—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE XXVIII.
To the Same.
ON THE GREAT NUMBER OF OLD MAIDS AND BACHELORS
IN LONDON SOME OF THE CAUSES.
LATELY, in company with my friend in black, whose
conversation is now both my amusement and instruc-
tion, I could not avoid observing the great numbers
of old bachelors and maiden ladies with which this city
seems to be overrun. " Sure, marriage," said I, " is not
sufficiently encouraged, or we should never behold such
crowds of battered beaux and decayed coquettes, still
attempting to drive a trade they have been so long unfit
for, and swarming upon the gaiety of the age. I behold
an old bachelor in the most contemptible light, as an
animal that lives upon the common stock without contri-
buting his share: he is a beast of prey, and the laws
should make use of as many stratagems, and as much
force, to drive the reluctant savage into the toils, as the
Indians when they hunt the rhinoceros. The mob should
be permitted to halloo after him, boys might play tricks
on him with impunity, every well-bred company should
laugh at him ; and if, when turned of sixty, he offered to
make love, his mistress might spit in his face, or, what
would be perhaps a greater punishment, should fairly
grant the favour.
" As for old maids," continued I, " they should not be
treated with so much severity, because I suppose none
would be so if they could. No lady in her senses would
choose to make a subordinate figure at christenings or
lyings-in, when she might be the principal herself; nor
curry favour with a sister-in-law, when she might com-
mand a husband; nor toil in preparing custards, when
she might lie a-bed, and give directions how they ought
to be made ; nor stifle all her sensations in demure for-
mality, when she might, with matrimonial freedom, shake
her acquaintance by the hand, and wink at a double entendre.
<pb>
No lady could be so very silly as to live single, if she could
help it. I consider an unmarried lady, declining into the
vale of years, as one of those charming countries border-
ing on China, that lies waste for want of proper inhabi-
tants. We are not to accuse the country, but the igno-
rance of its neighbours, who are insensible of its beauties,
though at liberty to enter and cultivate the soil."
" Indeed, Sir," replied my companion, " you are very
little acquainted with the English ladies, to think they are
old maids against their will. I dare venture to affirm, that
you can hardly select one of them all, but has had frequent
offers of marriage, which either pride or avarice has not made
her reject. Instead of thinking it a disgrace, they take
every occasion to boast of their former cruelty ; a soldier
does not exult more when he counts over the wounds he
has received, than a female veteran when she relates the
wounds she has formerly given : exhaustless when she
begins a narrative of the former death-dealing power of
her eyes, she tells of the knight in gold lace, who died
with a single frown, and never rose again till—he was
married to his maid ; of the squire who, being cruelly
denied, in a rage flew to the window, and lifting up the
sash, threw himself, in an agony—into his arm-chair; of
the parson, who, crossed in love, resolutely swallowed
opium, which banished the stings of despised love by—
making him sleep. In short, she talks over her former
losses with pleasure, and,1 like some tradesmen,1 finds con-
solation in the many bankruptcies she has suffered.
"For this reason, whenever I see a superannuated beauty
still unmarried, I tacitly accuse her either of pride, avarice,
coquetry, or affectation. There's Miss Jenny Tinderbox :
I once remember her to have had some beauty, and a
moderate fortune. Her elder sister happened to marry a
man of quality, and this seemed as a statute of virginity
against poor Jane. Because there was one lucky hit in
the family, she was resolved not to disgrace it by in-
troducing a tradesman; thus,2 rejecting her equals, and
neglected or despised by her superiors, she now acts in the
 1-1 Not in the Public Ledger.—ED.
" The ' Citizen' version reads " by thus rejecting," &u. The Public
Ledger has not " by;" and we take that reading as the best.—ED.
'
<pb>
capacity of tutoress to her sister's children, and undergoes
the drudgery of three servants without receiving the wages
of one.
" Miss Squeeze was a pawnbroker's daughter; her father
had early taught her that money was a very good thing,
and left her a moderate fortune at his death. She was so
perfectly sensible of the value of what she had got, that
she was resolved never to part with a farthing without an
equality on the part of her suitor; she thus refused several
offers made her by people who wanted to better themselves,
as the saying is, and grew old and ill-natured, without
ever considering that she should have made an abatement
in her pretensions, from her face being pale, and marked
with the small-pox.
" Lady Betty Tempest, on the contrary, had beauty, with
fortune and family. But, fond of conquest, she passed
from triumph to triumph: she had read plays and
romances, and there had learned, that a plain man of
common sense was no better than a fool. Such she re-
fused, and sighed only for the gay, giddy, inconstant, and
thoughtless. After she had thus rejected hundreds who
liked her, and sighed for hundreds who despised her, she
found herself insensibly deserted. At present she is com-
pany only for her aunts and cousins, and sometimes makes
one in a country-dance, with only one of the chairs for a
partner, casts off round a joint-stool, and sets to a corner
cupboard. In a word, she is treated with civil contempt
from every quarter, and placed, like a piece of old-fashioned
lumber, merely to fill up a corner.
" But Sophronia, the sagacious Sophronia ! how shall I
mention her ? She was taught to love Greek, and hate the
men from her very infancy. She has rejected fine gentle-
men because they were not pedants, and pedants because
they were not fine gentlemen; her exquisite sensibility
has taught her to discover every fault in every lover,
and her inflexible justice has prevented her pardoning
them : thus she rejected several offers, till the wrinkles of
age had overtaken her; and now, without one good feature
in her face, she talks incessantly of the beauties of the
mind."—Farewell.
<pb>
LETTEE XXIX.
To the Same.
WERE we to estimate the learning of the English by the
number of books that are every day published among them,
perhaps no country, not even China itself, could equal
them in this particular. I have reckoned not less than
twenty-three new books published in one day, which, upon
computation, makes eight thousand three hundred and
ninety-five in one year. Most of these are not confined to
one single science, but embrace the whole circle. History,
politics, poetry, mathematics, metaphysics, and the philo-
sophy of nature, are all comprised in a manual not larger
than that in which our children are taught the letters. If,
then, we suppose the learned of England to read but an
eighth part of the works which daily come from the press
(and surely none can pretend to learning upon less easy
terms), at this rate every scholar will read a thousand
books in one year. From such a calculation, you may con-
jecture what an amazing fund of literature a man must be
possessed of, who thus reads three new books every day,
not one of which but contains all the good things that
ever were said or written.
And yet I know not how it happens, but the English are
not, in reality, so learned as would seem from this calcu-
lation. We meet but few who know all arts and sciences
to perfection; whether it is that the generality are inca-
pable of such extensive knowledge, or that the authors of
those books are not adequate instructors. In China, the
Emperor himself takes cognizance of all the doctors in the
kingdom who profess authorship. In England, every man
may be an author, that can write; for they have by law a
liberty, not only of saying what they please, but of being
also as dull as they please.
Yesterday, I testified my surprise, to the man in black,
1 The date of this Letter in the Public Ledger is April 14, two days
before the date of the preceding Letter. The next Letter, continuing
the subject, did not appear in the Ledger till May 2.—ED.
<pb>
where writers could be found in sufficient number to throw
off the books I daily saw crowding from the press. I at
first imagined that their learned seminaries might take
this method of instructing the world. But to obviate this
objection, my companion assured me, that the doctors of
colleges never wrote, and that some of them had actually
forgot their reading; " but if you desire," continued he, "to
see a collection of authors, I fancy I can introduce you
this evening to a club, which assembles every Saturday at
seven, at the sign of The Broom, near Islington, to talk
over the business of the last, and the entertainment of
the week ensuing." l I accepted his invitation; we walked
together, and entered the house some time before the
usual hour for the company assembling.
My friend took this opportunity of letting me into the
characters of the principal members of the club, not even
the host excepted, who, it seems, was once an author him-
self, but preferred by a bookseller to this situation as a
reward for his former services.
" The first person," said he, " of our society, is JDoctor
Nonentity, a metaphysician. Most people think him a
profound scholar ; but, as he seldom speaks, I cannot be
positive in that particular; he generally spreads himself
before the fire, sucks his pipe, talks little, drinks much,
and is reckoned very good company. I'm told he writes
indexes to perfection: he makes essays on the origin of
evil, philosophical enquiries upon any subject, and draws
up an answer to any book upon twenty-four hours warn-
ing. You may distinguish him from the rest of the com-
pany by his long grey wig, and the blue handkerchief
round his neck.
" The next to him in merit and esteem is Tim Syllabub,
a droll creature : he sometimes shines as a star of the first
magnitude among the choice spirits of the age: he is
reckoned equally excellent at a rebus, a riddle, a bawdy
1 Goldsmith was not yet resident in Islington. Probably, however,
he was often to and fro, calling upon Newbery at Canonbury. At
this time he, no doubt, lodged in Wine Office Court. Perhaps we may
identify the "Broom" with the Fox (his brush) at Islington-green.
Nelson (' Hist. Islington') says the host of the Fox was " George Prince,
a man who had received a classical education, and was famous for his
home-brewed ale and for capping Latin verses."—ED.
<pb>
song, and a hymn for the Tabernacle. You will know him
by his shabby finery, his powdered wig, dirty shire, and
broken silk stockings.
" After him succeeds Mr. Tibs,' a very useful hand: he
writes receipts for the bite of a mad dog, and throws off
an Eastern tale to perfection; he understands the business
of an author as well as any man; for no bookseller alive
can cheat him. You may distinguish him by the peculiar
clumsiness of his figure, and the coarseness of his coat;
however, though it be coarse (as he frequently tells the
company), he has paid for it.
" Lawyer Squint is the politician of the society: he
makes speeches for Parliament, writes addresses to his
fellow-subjects, and letters to noble commanders ; he gives
the history of every new play, and finds seasonable thoughts
upon every occasion." My companion was proceeding in
his description, when the host came running in, with
terror on his countenance, to tell us that the door was
beset with bailiffs. " If that be the case, then," says my
companion, " we had as good be going; for I am positive
we shall not see one of the company this night. Where-
fore, disappointed, we were both obliged to return home—
he to enjoy the oddities which compose his character alone,
and I to write as usual to my friend the occurrences of the
day. Adieu.
LETTEE XXX.
To the Same.
BY my last advices from Moscow, I find the caravan has
not yet departed for China: I still continue to write,
expecting that you may receive a large number of letters
1 Not to be confounded with Beau Tibbs, whose name Goldsmith
always spells with two " b's."—ED.
2 Dated May 2, 1760, in the Public Ledger. See note 1, p. 109.
This Letter, when published in the Ledger, was headed with the follow-
ing little bit of professional hocus pocus—designed, perhaps, about
equally for the enjoyment of the pedants and the printers:—" IO- The
r
<pb>
at once. In them you will find rather a minute detail of
English peculiarities, than a general picture of their man-
ners or disposition. Happy it were for mankind, if all
travellers would thus, instead of characterizing a people
in general terms, lead us into a detail of those minute cir-
cumstances which first influenced their opinion. The
genius of a country should be investigated with a kind of
experimental enquiry: by this means, we should have more
precise and just notions of foreign nations, and detect
travellers themselves when they happened to form wrong
conclusions.1
My friend and I repeated our visit to the club of authors;
where, upon our entrance, we found the members all assem-
bled, and engaged in a loud debate.
The poet,2 in shabby finery, holding a manuscript in his
hand, was earnestly endeavouring to persuade the company
to hear him read the first book of an heroic poem, which
he had composed the day before. But against this all the
members very warmly objected. They knew no reason
why any member of the club should be indulged with a,
particular hearing, when many of them had published
whole volumes which had never been looked into. They
insisted that the law should be observed, where reading in
company was expressly noticed. It was in vain that the
plaintiff pleaded the peculiar merit of his piece; he spoke
to an assembly insensible to all his remonstrances : the
book of laws was opened, and read by the secretary, where
it was expressly enacted, " That whatsoever poet, speech-
maker, critic, or historian, should presume to engage the
company by reading his own works, he was to lay down
sixpence previous to opening the manuscript, and should
editor on this, and every other occasion, has endeavoured to translate
the letter-writer in such a manner as he himself, had he perfectly
understood English, would have written. The reader is requested also
to impute all the nonsense and dullness he may happen to find in this
and every other letter to errors of the press."—ED.
1 Here our author's ideas of travel and exploration again crop up.
See his review of Van Egmont's Travels (June, 1759), in our vol. iv.;
also see Letter CVIII. in the present vol., and the ' Life,' p. 25, &c.—
ED.
2 The Ledger version reads " A poet," and it adds " with a pale face."
As this character is to some extent a portrait of the author (see note 1
at p. 114), the omission may be noted.—ED.
<pb>
be charged one shilling an hour while he continued read-
ing : the said shilling to be equally distributed among the
company, as a recompense for their trouble." l
Our poet seemed at first to shrink at the penalty, hesi-
tating for some time whether he should deposit the fine,
or shut up the poem ; but, looking round, and perceiving
two strangers in the room, his love of fame outweighed
his prudence, and, laying down the sum by law established,
he insisted on his prerogative.
A profound silence ensuing, he began by explaining his
design. " Gentlemen," says he, " the present piece is not
one of your common epic poems, which come from the
press like paper-kites in summer : there are none of your
Turnuses or Didos in it; it is an heroical description of
nature. I only beg you '11 endeavour to make2 your souls
unison with mine, and hear with the same enthusiasm
with which I have written. The poem begins with the
description of an author's bedchamber: the picture was
sketched in my own apartment; for you must know, gen-
tlemen, that I am myself the hero." Then putting him-
self into the attitude of an orator, with all the emphasis
of voice and action, he proceeded:
" Where the Red Lion, flaring o'er the way,
Invites each passing stranger that can pay;
Where Calvert's butt, and Parson's black champagne,
Regale the drabs and bloods of Drury-lane :
There, in a lonely room, from bailiffs snug,
The Muse found Scroggen stretch'd beneath a rug.
A window, patch'd with paper, lent a ray,
That dimly show'd the state in which he lay;
The sanded floor that grits beneath the tread;
The humid wall with paltry pictures spread—
The Royal Game of Goose was there in view
And the Twelve Rules the Royal Martyr drew;
The Seasons, fram'd with listing, found a place,
And brave Prince William show'd his lamp-black face.
The morn was cold: he views with keen desire
The rusty grate, unconscious of a fire :
With beer and milk arrears the frieze was scor'd,
And five crack'd teacups dress'd the chimney board ;
1 The Ledger version reads—" for their pain in listening."—ED,
2 The Ledger has " tune " instead of " make."—ED.
III. I
<pb>
A night-cap deck'd his brows instead of bay,
A cap by night—a stocking all the day ! " *
With this last line he seemed so much elated, that he
was unable to proceed. " There, gentlemen," cries he,
" there is a description for you; Rabelais's bed-chamber
is but a fool to it:
' A cap by night—a stocking all the day!'
There is sound, and sense, and truth, and nature in the
trifling compass of ten little syllables."
He was too much employed in self-admiration to observe
the company; who, by nods, winks, shrugs, and stifled
laughter, testified every mark of contempt. He turned
severally to each for their opinion, and found all, however,
ready to applaud. One swore it was inimitable ; another
said it was damn'd fine; and a third cried out in a rap-
ture, " Garissimo!" At last, addressing himself to the
president, " And pray, Mr. Squint," says he, " let us have
your opinion."—" Mine !" answered the president (taking
the manuscript out of the author's hand); "may this
glass suffocate me, but I think it equal to any thing I
have seen; and I fancy" (continued he, doubling up the
poem and forcing it into the author's pocket) " that you
will get great honour when it comes out; so I shall
beg leave to put it in. We will not intrude upon your
good-nature, in desiring to hear more of it at present; ex
ungue Herculem, we are satisfied, perfectly satisfied." The
author made two or three attempts to pull it out a second
time, and the president made as many to prevent him.
Thus, though with reluctance, he was at last obliged to
sit down, contented with the commendations for which he
had paid.
When this tempest of poetry and praise was blown
over, one of the company changed the subject, by wonder-
ing how any man could be so dull as to write poetry at
present, since prose itself would hardly pay. " Would
you think it, gentlemen," continued he, " I have actually
1 This is a variation of the ' Description of an Author's Bed-chamber,'
in the Poems, vol. ii., p. 82. Another version is in Goldsmith's letter to
his brother Henry, 1759, vol. i., p. 451.—ED.
<pb>
written, last week, sixteen prayers, twelve bawdy jests,
and three sermons, all at the rate of sixpence a-piece;
and, what is still more extraordinary, the bookseller has
lost by the bargain. Such sermons would once have
gained me a prebend's stall; but now, alas ! we have
neither piety, taste, nor humour among us ! Positively,
if this season does not turn out better than it has begun,
unless the ministry commit some blunders to furnish us
with a new topic of abuse, I shall resume my old business
of working at the press, instead of finding it employ-
ment."
The whole club seemed to join in condemning the
season, as one of the worst that had come for some time :
a gentleman particularly observed that the nobility were
never known to subscribe worse than at present. " I
know not how it happens," said he, "though I follow
them up as close as possible, yet I can hardly get a
single subscription in a week. The houses of the great
are as inaccessible as a frontier garrison at midnight. I
never see a nobleman's door half opened, that some surly
porter or footman does not stand full in the breach. I
was yesterday to wait with a subscription proposal upon
my Lord Squash, the Creolian. I had posted myself at
his door the whole morning, and, just as he was getting
into his coach, thrust my proposal snug into his hand,
folded up in the form of a letter from myself. He just
glanced at the superscription, and not knowing the hand,
consigned it to his valet-de-chambre ; this respectable
personage treated it as his master, and put it into the
hands of the porter; the porter grasped my proposal
frowning; and, measuring my figure from top to toe, put
it back into my own hands unopened."
" To the devil I pitch all the nobility!" cries a little
man, in a peculiar accent; " I am sure they have of late
used me most scurvily. You must know, gentlemen, some
time ago, upon the arrival of a certain noble duke from
his travels, I sat myself down, and vamped up a fine
flaunting poetical panegyric, which I had written in such
a strain, that I fancied it would have even wheedled milk
from a mouse. In this I represented the whole kingdom
welcoming his grace to his native soil, not forgetting the
<pb>
loss France and Italy would sustain in their arts by his
departure. I expected to touch' for a bankrbill at least;
so, folding up my verses in gilt paper, I gave my last
half-crown to a genteel servant to be the bearer. My
letter was safely conveyed to his grace, and the servant,
after four hours absence, during which time I led the life
of a fiend, returned with a letter four times as big as
mine. Guess my extasy at the prospect of so fine a
return. I eagerly took the packet into my hands, that
trembled to receive it. I kept it some time unopened
before me, brooding over the expected treasure it con-
tained ; when opening it, as I hope to be saved, gentle-
men, his grace had sent me in payment for my poem, no
bank-bills, but six copies of verses, each longer than
mine, addressed to him upon the same occasion."
" A nobleman," cries a member, who had hitherto been
silent, " is created as much for the confusion of us
authors, as the catch-pole. I'll tell you a story, gentle-
men, which is as true as that this pipe is made of clay:—
When I was delivered of my first book, I owed my
tailor for a suit of clothes ; but that is nothing new, you
know, and may be any man's case as well as mine. Well,
owing him for a suit of clothes, and hearing that my book
took very well, he sent for his money and insisted upon
being paid immediately. Though I was at that time rich
in fame—for my book ran like wild-fire—yet I was very
short in money, and, being unable to satisfy his demand,
prudently resolved to keep my chamber, preferring a
prison of my own choosing at home, to one of my tailor's
choosing abroad. In vain the bailiffs used all their arts
to decoy me from my citadel; in vain they sent to let me
know that a gentleman wanted to speak with me at the
next tavern; in vain they came with an urgent message
from my aunt in the country ; in vain I was told that a
particular friend was at the point of death, and desired to
take his last farewell:—I was deaf, insensible, rock, ada-
mant ; the bailiffs could make no impression on my hard
heart, for I effectually kept my liberty by never stirring
out of the room.
1 The Public Ledyer has merely " to prevail."—ED.
<pb>
" This was very well for a fortnight; when one morning
I received a most splendid message from the Earl of
Doomsday, importing, that he had read my book, and
was in raptures with every line of it; he impatiently
longed to see the author, and had some designs which
might turn out greatly to my advantage. I paused upon
the contents of this message, and found there could be no
deceit, for the card was gilt at the edges, and the bearer,
I was told, had quite the looks of a gentleman. Witness,
ye powers, how my heart triumphed at my own import-
ance ! I saw a long perspective of felicity before me; I
applauded the taste of the times which never saw genius
forsaken: I had prepared a set introductory speech for
the occasion; five glaring compliments for his lordship,
and two more modest for myself. The next morning,
therefore, in order to be punctual to my appointment, I
took coach, and ordered the fellow to drive to the street
and house mentioned in his lordship's address. I had
the precaution to pull up the windows as I went along, to
keep off the busy part of mankind, and, big with ex-
pectation, fancied the coach never went fast enough. At
length, however, the wished for moment of its stopping
arrived: this for some time I impatiently expected, and
letting down the window in a transport, in order to take
a previous view of his lordship's magnificent palace and
situation, I found—poison to my sight!—I found myself
not in an elegant street, but a paltry lane; not at a
nobleman's door, but the door of a spunging-house: I
found the coachman had all this while been just driving
me to jail; and I saw the bailiff, with a devil's face,
coming out to secure me."1
. To a philosopher, no circumstance, however trifling, is
too minute; he finds instruction and entertainment in
occurrences, which are passed over by the rest of mankind,
as low, trite, and indifferent; it is from the number of
these particulars, which to many appear insignificant, that
he is at last enabled to form general conclusions; this,
therefore, must be my excuse for sending so far as China,
accounts of manners and follies, which, though minute in
1 A similar story is told of Goldsmith himself. See ' Life,' p. 26.—
ED.
<pb>
their own nature, serve more truly to characterize this
people, than histories of their public treaties, courts,
ministers, negotiations, and ambassadors. Adieu.
LETTEK XXXI.
To the Same.
THE PERFECTION OF THE CHINESE IN THE ART OF GARDEN-
ING DESCRIPTION OF A CHINESE GARDEN.
THE English have not yet brought the art of gardening
to the same perfection with the Chinese, but have lately
begun to imitate them. Nature is now followed with
greater assiduity than formerly ; the trees are suffered to
shoot out into the utmost luxuriance; the streams, no
longer forced from their native beds, are permitted to wind
along the valleys; spontaneous flowers take the place of
the finished parterre, and the enamelled meadow of the
shaven green.
Yet still the English are far behind us in this charming
art; their designers have not yet attained the power of
uniting instruction with beauty. A European will scarcely
conceive my meaning, when I say that there is scarcely a
garden in China which does not contain some fine moral,
couched under the general design, where one is not taught
wisdom as he walks, and feels the force of some noble
truth, or delicate precept, resulting from the disposition of
the groves, streams, or grottos. Permit me to illustrate
what I mean by a description of my gardens at Quamsi.
My heart still hovers round those scenes of former happi-
ness with pleasure ; and I find a satisfaction in enjoying
them at this distance, though but in imagination.
You descended from the house between two groves of
trees, planted in such a manner, that they were impene-
trable to the eye ; while on each hand the way was adorned
with all that was beautiful in porcelain, statuary, and
painting. This passage from the house opened into an
area surrounded with rocks, flowers, trees, and shrubs, but
<pb>
119
all so disposed as if each was the spontaneous production
of nature. As you proceeded forward on this lawn, to
your right and left hand were two gates, opposite each
other, of very different architecture and design ; and before
you lay a temple, built rather with minute elegance than
ostentation.
The right hand gate was planned with the utmost sim-
plicity, or rather rudeness : ivy clasped round the pillars,
the baleful cypress hung over it; time seemed to have de-
stroyed all the smoothness and regularity of the stone;
two champions, with lifted clubs, appeared in the act of
guarding its access ; dragons and serpents were seen in
the most hideous attitudes, to deter the spectator from
approaching; and the perspective view that lay behind
seemed dark and gloomy to the last degree; the stranger
was tempted to enter only from the motto,—PERVIA
VIRTUTI.'
The opposite gate was formed in a very different manner:
the architecture was light, elegant, and inviting ; flowers
hung in wreaths round the pillars ; all was finished in the
most exact and masterly manner; the very stone of which
it was built still preserved its polish; nymphs, wrought
by the hand of a master, in the most alluring attitudes,
beckoned the stranger to approach; while all that lay be-
hind, as far as the eye could reach, seemed gay, luxuriant,
and capable of affording endless pleasure. The motto it-
self contributed to invite him; for, over the gate were
written these words,—-FACILIS DESCENSUS.
By this time I fancy you begin to perceive, that the
gloomy gate was designed to represent the road to Virtue;
the opposite, the more agreeable passage to Vice. It is
but natural to suppose, that the spectator was always
tempted to enter by the gate which offered him so many
allurements. I always in these cases left him to his choice;
but generally found that he took to the left, which pro-
mised most entertainment.
Immediately upon his entering the gate of Vice, the
trees and flowers were disposed in such a manner as to
make the most pleasing impression; but as he walked
1 The Public Ledger text adds—" which I received from an English
merchant."—ED.
<pb>
farther on, he insensibly found the garden assume the air
of a wilderness,—the landscapes began to darken—the
paths grew more intricate—he appeared to go downwards
—frightful rocks seemed to hang over his head—gloomy
caverns, unexpected precipices, awful ruins, heaps of un-
buried bones, and terrifying sounds, caused by unseen
waters, began to take place of what at first appeared so
lovely : it was in vain to attempt returning; the labyrinth
was too much perplexed for any but myself to find the
Way back. In short, when sufficiently impressed with the
horrors of what he saw, and the imprudence of his choice,
I brought him by a hidden door a shorter way back into
the area from whence at first he had strayed.
The gloomy gate now presented itself before the stranger;
and though there seemed little in its appearance to tempt
his curiosity, yet, encouraged by the motto, he gradually
proceeded. The darkness of the entrance, the frightful
figures that seemed to obstruct his way, the trees, of a
mournful green, conspired at first to disgust him: as he
went forward, however, all began to open and wear a more
pleasing appearance; beautiful cascades, beds of flowers,
trees loaded with fruit or blossoms, and unexpected brooks
improved the scene ; he now found that he was ascending,
and as he proceeded, all nature grew more beautiful; the
prospect widened as he went higher, even the air itself
seemed to become more pure. Thus pleased and happy
from unexpected beauties, I at last led him to an arbour,
from whence he could view the garden, and the whole
country round, and where he might own, that the road to
Virtue terminated in Happiness.
Though, from this description, you may imagine that a
vast tract of ground was necessary to exhibit such a pleas-
ing variety in, yet be assured, I have seen several gardens
in England take up ten times the space which mine did,
without half the beauty. A very small extent of ground
is enough for an elegant taste; the greater room is re-
quired if magnificence is in view. There is no spot, though
ever so little, which a skilful designer might not thus im-
prove, so as to convey a delicate allegory, and impress
the mind with truths the most useful and necessary.
Adieu.
<pb>
121
LETTEE XXXII.
To the Same.
OF THE DEGENERACY OF SOME OF THE ENGLISH NOBILITY A MUSHROOM FEAST AMONG THE TARTARS.1
IN a late excursion with my friend into the country, a
gentleman with a blue riband tied round his shoulder, and
in a chariot drawn by six horses, passed swiftly by us, at-
tended with a numerous train of captains, lackeys, and
coaches filled with women.2 When we were recovered from
the dust raised by this cavalcade, and could continue our
discourse without danger of suffocation, I observed to my
companion, that all this state and equipage, which he
seemed to despise, would in China be regarded with the
utmost reverence, because such distinctions were always
the reward of merit; the greatness of a mandarine's re-
tinue being a most certain mark of the superiority of his
abilities or virtue.
" The gentleman who has now passed us," replied my
companion, " has no claims from his own merit to distinc-
tion ; he is possessed neither of abilities nor virtue ; it is
enough for him that one of his ancestors was possessed of
these qualities two hundred years before him. There was
a time, indeed, when his family deserved their title, but
they are long since degenerated, and his ancestors, for
more than a-century, have been more and more solicitous
to keep up the breed of their dogs and horses, than that
of their children. This very nobleman, simple as he seems,
is descended from a race of statesmen and heroes ; but
unluckily, his great-grandfather marrying a cook-maid,
and she having a trifling passion for his lordship's groom,
they somehow crossed the strain, and produced an heir,
who took after his mother in his great love to good eating,
and his father in a violent affection for horse flesh. These
1 The date of this Letter in the Public Ledger is April 22, 1760.—
ED.
2 The Ledge}- version reads, " a numerous train of captains, lackeys,
and women on side-saddles."—ED.
'
<pb>
passions have for some generations passed on from father
to son, and are now become the characteristics of the
family, his present lordship being equally remarkable for
his kitchen and his stable."
" But such a nobleman," cried I, " deserves our pity,
thus placed in so high a sphere of life, which only the
more exposes to contempt. A king may confer titles, but
it is personal merit alone that ensures respect. I suppose,"
added I, " that such men are despised by their equals,
neglected by their inferiors, and condemned to live among
involuntary dependents in irksome solitude ? "
" You are still under a mistake," replied my companion ;
" for, though this nobleman is a stranger to generosity;
though he takes twenty opportunities in a day of letting
his guests know how much he despises them ; though he
is possessed neither of taste, wit, nor wisdom ; though in-
capable of improving others by his conversation, and never
known to enrich any by his bounty; yet, for all this, his
company is eagerly sought after: he is a lord, and that is
as much as most people desire in a companion. Quality
and title have such allurements, that hundreds are ready
to give up all their own importance, to cringe, to flatter,
to look little, and to pall every pleasure in constraint,
merely to be among the great, though without the least
hopes of improving their understanding, or sharing their
generosity : they might be happy among their equals, but
those are despised for company where they are despised in
turn. You saw what a crowd of humble cousins, card-
ruined beaux, and captains on half-pay, were willing to
make up this great man's retinue down to his country seat.
Not one of all these that could not lead a more comfortable
life at home, in their little lodgings of three shillings a-
week, with their lukewarm dinner, served up between two
pewter plates from a cook's shop. Yet, poor devils ! they
are willing to undergo the impertinence and pride of their
entertainer, merely to be thought to live among the great:
they are willing to pass the summer in bondage, though
conscious they are taken down only to approve his lord-
ship's taste upon every occasion, to tag all his stupid ob-
servations with a ' very true,' to praise his stable, and
descant upon his claret and cookery."
<pb>
" The pitiful humiliations of the gentlemen you are now
describing," said I, " put me in mind of a custom among
the Tartars of Koreki, not entirely dissimilar to this we
are now considering.1 The Russians, who trade with them,
carry thither a kind of mushrooms,2 which they exchange
for furs of squirrels, ermines, sables, and foxes. These
mushrooms the rich Tartars lay up in large quantities for
the winter; and when a nobleman makes a mushroom
feast, all the neighbours around are invited. The mush-
rooms are prepared by boiling, by which the water acquires
an intoxicating quality, and is a sort of drink which the
Tartars prize beyond all other. When the nobility and
ladies are assembled, and the ceremonies usual between
people of distinction over, the mushroom broth goes freely
round; they laugh, talk double entendre, grow fuddled,
and become excellent company. The poorer sort, who
love mushroom broth to distraction as well as the rich,
but cannot afford it at the first hand, post themselves on
these occasions round the huts of the rich, and watch the
opportunities of the ladies and gentlemen as they come
down to pass their liquor; and holding a wooden bowl,
catch the delicious fluid, very little altered by filtration,
being still strongly tinctured with the intoxicating quality.
Of this they drink with the utmost satisfaction, and thus
they get as drunk and as jovial as their betters."
" Happy nobility," cries my companion, " who can fear
no diminution of respect, unless by being seized with a
strangury, and who when most drunk are most useful!
Though we have not this custom among us, I foresee, that
if it were introduced, we might have many a toad-eater in
England, ready to drink from the wooden bowl on these
occasions, and to praise the flavour of his lordship's liquor.
As we have different classes of gentry, who knows but we
may see a lord holding the bowl to a minister, a knight
holding it to his lordship, and a simple squire drinking it
double distilled from the loins of the knighthood ? For
1 Van Stralenberg, a writer of credit, gives the same account of this
people. Vid. an Historico-Geographical Description of the North-oastern
parts of Europe and Asia, p. 397.—GOLDSMITH.
2 The Public Ledger text adds, " called in the Russian tongue much-
amor."—ED.
<pb>
my part, I shall never for the future hear a great man's
flatterers haranguing in his praise, that I shall not fancy
I behold the wooden bowl; for I can see no reason why a
man, who can live easily and happily at home, should bear
the drudgery of decorum, and the impertinence of his enter-
tainer, unless intoxicated with a passion for all that was
quality ; unless he thought that whatever came from the
great was delicious, and had the tincture of the mushroom
in it."' Adieu.
LETTER XXXIII.
To the Same.
THE MANNER OF WRITING AMONG THE CHINESE THE
EASTERN TALES OF MAGAZINES, ETC., RIDICULED.
I AM disgusted, O Fum Hoam, even to sickness disgusted.
Is it possible to bear the presumption of those islanders,
when they pretend to instruct me in the ceremonies of
China ! They lay it down as a maxim, that every person
who comes from thence must express himself in metaphor,,
swear by Alia, rail against wine, and behave, and talk, and
write, like a Turk or Persian. They make no distinction
between our elegant manners, and the voluptuous barba-
rities of our Eastern neighbours. Wherever I come, I
raise either diffidence or astonishment: some fancy me no
Chinese, because I am formed more like a man than a
monster; and others wonder to find one born five thou-
sand miles from England, endued with common sense.
" Strange," say they, " that a man who has received his
education at such a distance from London, should have
common sense ; to be born out of England, and yet have
common sense! Impossible ! He must be some English-
1 One early edition omits " in it" at the end. The Public Ledger text
closes thus:—" unless, intoxicated with a passion for all that was
quality, he thought that whatever came from the great was delicious,
and was fond of all that had a tincture of the mushroom in it, no matter
how disagreeable the circumstances by which it was attained."—ED.
<pb>
man in disguise; his very visage has nothing of the true
exotic barbarity."
I yesterday received an invitation from a lady of distinc-
tion, who, it seems, had collected all her knowledge of
Eastern manners from fictions every day propagated here,
under the titles of Eastern Tales and Oriental Histories.
She received me very politely, but seemed to wonder that
I neglected bringing opium and a tobacco-box: when
chairs were drawn for the rest of the company, I was
assigned my place on a cushion on the floor. It was in
vain that I protested the Chinese used chairs as in Europe ;
she understood decorums too well to entertain me with
the ordinary civilities.
I had scarce been seated according to her directions,
when the footman was ordered to pin a napkin under my
chin: this I protested against, as being no way Chinese;
however, the whole company, who, it seems, were a club of
connoisseurs, gave it unanimously against me, and the
napkin was pinned accordingly.
It was impossible to be angry with people, who seemed
to err only from an excess of politeness, and I sat con-
tented, expecting their importunities were now at an end ;
but as soon as ever dinner was served, the lady demanded,
whether I was for a plate of bear's claws,1 or a slice of
birds' nests.2 As these were dishes with which I was
utterly acquainted, I was desirous of eating only what I
knew, and therefore begged to be helped from a piece of
beef that lay on the side table : my request at once discon-
certed the whole company. A Chinese eat beef ! that
could never be: there was no local propriety in Chinese
beef, whatever there might be in Chinese pheasant. " Sir,"
said my entertainer, " I think I have some reason to fancy
myself a judge of these matters ; in short, the Chinese
never eat beef ; so that I must be permitted to recommend
the pilaw. There was never better dressed at Pekin ; the
saffron and rice are well boiled, and the spices in perfec-
tion."
1 The Public Ledger has " Pilaw," as lower down in this paragraph.
—ED.
" The Ledger reads " Cuacushew." See Goldsmith on birds'-nest soup,
&c., in the extracts from his ' Animated Nature,' in our vol. iv.—En.
<pb>
I had no sooner begun to eat what was laid before me,
than I found the whole company as much astonished as
before: it seems I made no use of my chop-sticks. A
grave gentleman, whom I take to be an author, harangued
very learnedly (as the company seemed to think) upon the
use which was made of them in China. He entered into
a long argument with himself about their first introduc-
tion, without once appealing to me, who might be supposed
best capable of silencing the enquiry. As the gentleman
therefore took my silence for a mark of 'his own superior
sagacity, he was resolved to pursue the triumph : he talked
of our cities, mountains, and animals, as familiarly as if he
had been born in Quamsi, but as erroneously as if a native
of the moon. He attempted to prove that I had nothing
of the true Chinese cut in my visage ; showed that my
cheek-bones should have been higher, and my forehead
broader. In short, he almost reasoned me out of my
country, and effectually persuaded the rest of the company
to be of his opinion.
I was going to expose his mistakes, when it was insisted,
that I had nothing of the true Eastern manner in my de-
livery. " This gentleman's conversation," says one the
ladies, who was a great reader, " is like our own,—mere
chit-chat and common sense: there is nothing like sense
in the true Eastern style, where nothing more is required
but sublimity. Oh! for a history of Aboulfaouris, the
grand voyager, of genii, magicians, rocks, bags of bullets,
giants, and enchanters, where all is great, obscure, magni-
ficent, and unintelligible ! "—" I have written many a sheet
of Eastern tale myself," interrupts the author, " and I defy
the severest critic to say but that I have stuck close to the
true manner. I have compared a lady's chin to the snow
upon the mountains of Bomek; a soldier's sword to the
clouds that obscure the face of heaven. If riches are men-
tioned, I compare them to the flocks that graze the ver-
dant Tefflis; if poverty, to the mists that veil the brow of
Mount Baku. I have used thee and thou upon all occa-
sions ; I have described fallen stars, and splitting moun-
tains, not forgetting the little houries, who make a pretty
figure in every description. But you shall hear how I
generally begin—' Eben-ben-bolo, who was the son of Ban,
<pb>
was born on the foggy summits of Benderabassi. His beard
was whiter than the feathers which veil the breast of the
penguin ; his eyes were like the eyes of doves when washed
fey the dews of the morning; his hair, which hung like the
willow weeping over the glassy stream, was so beautiful
that it seemed to reflect its own brightness; and his feet
were as the feet of a wild deer which fleeth to the tops of
the mountains.' There, there is the true Eastern taste for
you; every advance made towards sense, is only a devia-
tion from sound. Eastern tales should always be sonorous,
lofty, musical, and unmeaning."
I could not avoid smiling, to hear a native of England
attempt to instruct me in the true Eastern idiom; and
after he looked round some time for applause, I presumed
to ask him, whether he had ever travelled into the East ? to
which he replied in the negative. I demanded whether he
understood Chinese, or Arabic ? to which also he answered
as before. " Then how, Sir," said I, " can you pretend to
determine upon the Eastern style, who are entirely unac-
quainted with the Eastern writings ? Take, Sir, the word
of one who is professedly a Chinese, and who is actually
acquainted with the Arabian writers, that what is palmed
upon you daily for an imitation of Eastern writing, no way
resembles their manner, either in sentiment or diction. In
the East, similes are seldom used, and metaphors almost
wholly unknown;1 but in China particularly, the very re-
verse of what you allude to takes place: a cool phleg-
matic method of writing prevails there. The writers of
that country, ever more assiduous to instruct than to please,
address rather the judgment than the fancy. Unlike many
authors of Europe who have no consideration of the reader's
time, they generally leave more to be understood than they
express.
" Besides, Sir, you must not expect from an inhabitant
of China the same ignorance, the same unlettered sim-
plicity, that you find in a Turk, Persian, or native of Peru.
1 This is a mistake. Oriental literature abounds in metaphor and
similes; but Goldsmith either had not paid sufficient attention to the
subject to be aware of this fact, or he was content to overlook it in his
eagerness to condemn the clumsy exaggerations of scribblers who affected
to imitate the Eastern style.—B.
<pb>
The Chinese are versed in the sciences as well as you, and
are masters of several arts unknown to the people of
Europe. Many of them are instructed not only in their
own national learning, but are perfectly well acquainted
with the languages and learning of the West. If my
word in such a case is not to be taken, consult your own
travellers on this head, who affirm, that the scholars of
Pekin and Siam sustain theological theses in Latin. ' The
college of Masprend, which is but a league from Siam,'
says one of your travellers,1 ' came in a body to salute our
ambassador. Nothing gave me more sincere pleasure,
than to behold a number of priests, venerable both from
age and modesty, followed by a number of youths of all
nations, Chinese, Japanese, Tonquinese, of Cochin China,
Pegu, and Siam, all willing to pay their respects in the
most polite manner imaginable. A Cochin Chinese made
an excellent Latin oration upon this occasion; he was
succeeded and even outdone by a student of Tonquin,
who was as well skilled in the Western learning as any
scholar of Paris.' Now, Sir, if youths, who never stirred
from home, are so perfectly skilled in your laws and
learning, surely more must be expected from one like me,
who have travelled so many thousand miles, who have
conversed familiarly for several years with the English
factors established at Canton, and the missionaries sent
us from every part of Europe. The unaffected of every
country nearly resemble each other, and a page of our
Confucius and of your Tillotson have scarce any mate-
rial difference. Paltry affectation, strained allusions,
and disgusting finery, are easily attained by those who
choose to wear them : and they are but too frequently the
badges of ignorance or of stupidity, whenever it would
endeavour to please."
I was proceeding in my discourse, when, looking round,
I perceived the company no way attentive to what I at-
tempted, with so much earnestness, to enforce. One lady
was whispering her that sat next, another was studying
the merits of a fan, a third began to yawn, and the author
1 ' Journal ou Suite du Voyage de Siam, en forme de Lettres familieres,
fait en 1685 et 1686, par M. L. D. C.' p. 174, edit. Amstelod. 1686.—
GOLDSMITH.
<pb>
himself fell fast asleep. I thought it, therefore, high
time to make a retreat, nor did the company seern to show
any regret at my preparations for departure: even the
lady who had invited me, with the most mortifying insen-
sibility, saw me seize my hat, and rise from my cushion;
nor was I invited to repeat my visit, because it was found
that I aimed at appearing rather a reasonable creature,
than an outlandish idiot. Adieu.1
LETTER XXXIV.
To the Same.
OF THE PRESENT RIDICULOUS PASSION OF THE NOBILITY
FOB PAINTING.2
THE polite arts are, in this country, subject to as many
revolutions as its laws or politics: not only the objects of
fancy and dress, but even of delicacy and taste, are
directed by the capricious influence of fashion. I am told
there has been a time when poetry was universally en-
couraged by the great; when men of the first rank not
only patronized the poet, but produced the finest models
for his imitation. It was then the English sent forth
those glowing rhapsodies, which we have so often read
over together with rapture; poems big with all the sub-
limity of Mencius,3 and supported by reasoning as strong
as that of Zimpo.
The nobility are fond of wisdom, but they are also fond
1 At the end of this Letter in the Public Ledger is the following
note :—" S3~ A letter, signed D. Z., has been received, and the justice
of the remarks contained in it are acknowledged; for which the writer
has the thanks of the gentleman to whom it was addressed."—ED.
2 Date in the Public Ledger May 6, 1760.—ED.
3 Sir J. F. Davis says ('Chinese,' 1836, vol. ii., p. 51):—" Ranking
next to Confucius (similis aut secundus) is the celebrated Mencius, so
called by the Jesuits, from his Chinese name, Meng-tse. He lived about
a century after his great predecessor, whose doctrines he still further
illustrated and promoted, and left behind him the fourth of the sacred
books, bearing his own name."—ED.
III. K
<pb>
of having it without study; to read poetry required
thought; and the English nobility were not fond of
thinking: they soon therefore placed their affections upon
music, because in this they might indulge a happy vacancy,
and yet still have pretensions to delicacy and taste as
before. They soon brought their numerous dependents
into an approbation of their pleasures ; who, in turn, led
their thousand imitators to feel or feign similitude of
passion. Colonies of singers were now imported from
abroad at a vast expense; and it was expected the English
would soon be able to set examples to Europe. All these
expectations, however, were soon dissipated. In spite of
the zeal which fired the great, the ignorant vulgar refused
to be taught to sing ; refused to undergo the ceremonies
which were to initiate them in the singing fraternity :
thus the colony from abroad dwindled by degrees; for
they were of themselves, unfortunately, incapable of
propagating the breed.
Music having thus lost its splendour, painting is now
become the sole object of fashionable care. The title of
connoisseur in that art is at present the safest passport
in every fashionable society; a well timed shrug, an ad-
miring attitude, and one or two exotic tones of exclama-
tion, are sufficient qualifications for men of low circum-
stances to curry favour. Even some of the young nobility
are themselves early instructed in handling the pencil,
while their happy parents, big with expectation, foresee
the walls of every apartment covered with the manu-
factures of their posterity.
But many of the English are not content with giving
all their time to this art at home ; some young men of
distinction are found to travel through Europe, with no
other intent than that of understanding and collecting pic-
tures, studying seals,and describing statues. On they travel
from this cabinet of curiosities to that gallery of pictures ;
waste the prime of life in wonder; skilful in pictures,
ignorant in men ; yet impossible to be reclaimed, because
their follies take shelter under the names of delicacy and
taste.
It is true, painting should have due encouragement; as
the painter can undoubtedly fit up our apartments in a
<pb>
much, more elegant manner than the upholsterer ; but I
should think a man of fashion makes but an indifferent
exchange, who lays out all that time in furnishing his
house, which he should have employed in the furniture
of his head. A person who shows no other symptoms of
taste than his cabinet, or gallery, might as well boast to
me of the furniture of his kitchen.1
I know no other motive but vanity, that induces the
great to testify such an inordinate passion for pictures.
After the piece is bought, and gazed at eight or ten days
successively, the purchaser's pleasure must surely be
over; all the satisfaction he can then have is to show it to
others; he may be considered as the guardian of a treasure
of which he makes no manner of use; his gallery is fur-
nished not for himself but the connoisseur, who is gene-
rally some humble flatterer, ready to feign a rapture he
does not feel, and as necessary to the happiness of a
picture buyer, as gazers are to the magnificence of an
Asiatic procession.
I have enclosed a letter from a youth of distinction, on
his travels, to his father in England ; in which he appears
addicted to no vice, seems obedient to his governor, of a
good natural disposition, and fond of improvement; but,
at the same time, early taught to regard cabinets and
galleries as the only proper schools of improvement, and
to consider a skill in pictures as the properest knowledge
for a man of quality.—
" MY LORD,—We have been but two days at Antwerp ;
wherefore I havs sat down, as soon as possible, to give
you some account of what we have seen since our arrival,
desirous of letting no opportunity pass without writing to
so good a father. Immediately upon alighting from our
1 The Public Ledger text reads, " of his dexterity in carving." Prior
remarks here that, " The estimate formed of painting in this passage,
and in the whole letter, is very low for a poet—if, indeed, poetry and
painting have any necessary connexion in the mind. Examples to the
contrary are numerous; but Goldsmith had the courage to express what
many others no doubt think. At a subsequent period he confessed his
ignorance of the art." The " subsequent period " mentioned is, no doubt,
that of the dedication to Sir Joshua Reynolds, 1770, of the 'Deserted
Village.' See the Dedication at vol. ii., p. 31.—ED.
<pb>
Rotterdam machine, my governor, who is immoderately
fond of paintings, and, at the same time, an excellent
judge, would let no time pass till we paid our respects to
the church of the Virgin mother, which contains treasure
beyond estimation. We took an infinity of pains in
knowing its exact dimensions, and differed half a foot in
our calculation; so I leave that to some succeeding infor-
mation. I really believe my governor and I could have
lived and died there. There is scarce a pillar in the whole
church that is not adorned by a Eubens, a Vander
Meuylen, a Vandyke, or a Wouvennan. What attitudes,
carnations, and draperies! I am almost induced to pity
the English, who have none of those exquisite pieces
among them. As we were willing to let slip no oppor-
tunity of doing business, we immediately after went to
wait on Mr. Hogendorp, whom you have so frequently
commended for his judicious collection. His cameos are
indeed beyond price; his intaglios not so good. He
showed us one of an officiating flamen, which he thought
to be an antique; but my governor, who is not to be
deceived in these particulars, soon found it to be an arrant
cinque cento. I could not, however, sufficiently admire
the genius of Mr. Hogendorp, who has been able to
collect, from all parts of the world, a thousand things
which nobody knows the use of. Except your Lordship
and my governor, I do not know any body I admire so
much. He is, indeed, a surprising genius. The next
morning early, as we were resolved to take the whole day
before us, we sent our compliments to Mr. Van Sprokken,
desiring to see his gallery, which request he very politely
complied with. His gallery measures fifty feet by twenty,
and is well filled ; but what surprised me most of all, was
to see a Holy Family just like your Lordship's, which, this
ingenious gentleman assures me is the true original. I
own this gave me inexpressible uneasiness, and I fear it
will to your Lordship, as I had flattered myself that the only
original was in your Lordship's possession : I would advise
you, however, to take yours down, till its merit can be
ascertained, my governor assuring me, that he intends to
write a long dissertation to prove its originality. One
might study in this city for ages, and still find something
<pb>
new. We went from this to view the cardinal's statues,
which are really very fine ; there were three spintria exe-
cuted in a very masterly manner, all arm in arm. The
torse which I heard you talk so much of, is at last disco-
vered to be a Hercules spinning, and not a Cleopatra
bathing, as your Lordship had conjectured: there has
been a treatise written to prove it.
My Lord Firmly' is certainly a Goth, a Vandal; no taste
in the world for painting. I wonder how any call him a
man of taste. Passing through the streets of Antwerp a
few days ago, and observing the nakedness of the inhabi-
tants, he was so barbarous as to observe, that he thought
the best method the Flemings could take, was to sell their
pictures, and buy clothes. Ah, Coglione ! We shall go to-
morrow to Mr. Carwarden's cabinet, and the next day we
shall see the curiosities collected by Van Ban, and the day
after we shall pay a visit to Mount Calvary, and after that
—but I find my paper finished; so, with the most sincere
wishes to your Lordship's happiness, and with hopes,
after having seen Italy, that centre of pleasure, to return
home worthy the care and expense which has been gene-
rously laid out in my improvement, I remain, my Lord,
yours," <fcc.
LETTER XXXV.
From Hingpo, a Slave in Persia, to Altangi, a Travelling
Philosopher of China, by the way of Moscow.
THE PHILOSOPHER'S SON DESCRIBES A LADY, HIS
FELLOW CAPTIVE.
FORTUNE has made me the slave of another, but nature
and inclination render me entirely subservient to you : a
tyrant commands my body, but you are master of my heart.
And yet let not thy inflexible nature condemn me when I
confess, that I find my soul shrink with my circumstances.
I feel my mind, not less than my body, bend beneath the
1 Lord * * * in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
rigours of servitude ; the master whom I serve grows every
day more formidable. In spite of reason, which should
teach me to despise him, his hideous image fills even my
dreams with horror.
A few days ago, a Christian slave who wrought in the
gardens, happening to enter an arbour where the tyrant
was entertaining the ladies of his harem with coffee, the
unhappy captive was instantly stabbed to the heart for his
intrusion. I have been preferred to his place, which,
though less laborious than my former station, is yet more
ungrateful, as it brings me nearer him whose presence
excites sensations at once of disgust and apprehension.
Into what a state of misery are the modem Persians
fallen ! A nation famous for setting the world an example
of freedom, is now become a land of tyrants, and a den of
slaves. The houseless Tartar of Kamschatka, who enjoys
his herbs and his fish in unmolested freedom, may be
envied, if compared to the thousands who pine here in
hopeless servitude, and curse the day that gave them being.
Is this just dealing, Heaven ! to render millions wretched
to swell up the happiness of a few ? cannot the powerful
of this earth be happy without our sighs and tears ? must
every luxury of the great be woven from the calamities of
the poor? It must, it must surely be, that this jarring
discordant life is but the prelude to some future harmony :
the soul, attuned to virtue here, shall go from hence to fill
up the universal choir where Tien1 presides in person, where
there shall be no tyrants to frown, no shackles to bind, nor
no whips to threaten ;2 where I shall once more meet my
father with rapture, and give a loose to filial piety; where
I shall hang on his neck, and hear the wisdom of his lips,
and thank him for all the happiness to which he has intro-
duced me.
The wretch whom fortune has made my master, has
lately purchased several slaves of both sexes; among the
rest I hear a Christian captive talked of with admiration.
1 Sir J. P. Davis says (' Chinese,' 1836, vol. ii., p. 64):—" Of Tien,.
or heaven, they [the Chinese] sometimes speak as of the Supreme
Being."—ED.
2 Compare the sermon to the prisoners, in the ' Vicar of WakefieM/
vol. i., pp. 211-12.—ED.
<pb>
The eunuch who bought her, and who is accustomed to
survey beauty with indifference, speaks of her with emo-
tion ! Her pride, however, astonishes her attendant slaves
not less than her beauty. It is reported that she refuses
the warmest solicitations of her haughty lord : he has even
offered to make her one of his four wives upon changing
her religion, and conforming to his. It is probable she
cannot refuse such extraordinary offers, and her delay is
perhaps intended to enhance her favours.
I have just now seen her ; she inadvertently approached
the place without a veil, where I sat writing. She seemed
to regard the heavens alone with fixed attention: there
her most ardent gaze was directed. Genius of the sun!
what unexpected softness! what animated grace! her
beauty seemed the transparent covering of virtue. Celes-
tial beings could not wear a look of more perfection, while
sorrow humanized her form, and mixed my admiration
with pity. I rose from the bank on which I sat, and she
retired ; happy that none observed us ; for such an inter-
view might have been fatal.
I have regarded, till now, the opulence and the power of
my tyrant without envy. I saw him with a mind incap-
able of enjoying the gifts of fortune, and consequently re-
garded him as one loaded, rather than enriched with its
favours ; but at present, when I think that so much beauty
is reserved only for him—that so many charms should be
lavished on a wretch incapable of feeling the greatness of
the blessing,—I own I feel a reluctance to which I have
hitherto been a stranger.
But let not my father impute those uneasy sensations
to so trifling a cause as love. No, never let it be thought
that your son, and the pupil of the wise .Fum Hoam, could
stoop to so degrading a passion ; I am only displeased at
seeing so much excellence so unjustly disposed of.
The uneasiness which I feel is not for myself, but for
the beautiful Christian. When I reflect on the barbarity
of him for whom she is designed, I pity—indeed I pity
her: when I think that she must only share one heart,
who deserves to command a thousand, excuse me if I feel
an emotion, which universal benevolence extorts from me.
As I am convinced that you take a pleasure in those sallies
<pb>
of humanity, and are particularly pleased with compassion,
I could not avoid discovering the sensibility with which I
felt this beautiful stranger's distress. I have for a while
forgot, in hers, the miseries of my own hopeless situation.
The tyrant grows every day more severe; and love, which
softens all other minds into tenderness, seems only to have
increased his severitv. Adieu.
LETTER XXXVI.
From the Same.
A CONTINUANCE Or HIS CORRESPONDENCE—THE BEAUTIFUL
CAPTIVE CONSENTS TO MARRY HER LORD.
THE whole harem is filled with a tumultuous joy ; Zelis,
the beautiful captive, has consented to embrace the religion
of Mahomet, and become one of the wives of the fastidious
Persian. It is impossible to describe the transport that
sits on every face on this occasion. Music and feasting
fill every apartment; the most miserable slave seems to
forget his chains, and sympathizes with the happiness of
Mostadad. The herb we tread beneath our feet is not
made more for our use than every slave around him for
their imperious master; mere machines of obedience, they
wait with silent assiduity, feel his pains, and rejoice in his
exultation. Heavens ! how much is requisite to make one
man happy!
Twelve of the most beautiful slaves, and I among the
number, have got orders to prepare for carrying him.
in triumph to the bridal apartment. The blaze of per-
fumed torches are to imitate the day: the dancers and
singers are hired at a vast expense. The nuptials are to
be celebrated on the approaching feast of Barboura, when
a hundred taels in gold are to be distributed among the
barren wives, in order to pray for fertility from the ap-
proaching union.
What will not riches procure ! A hundred domestics,
who curse the tyrant in their souls, are commanded to
<pb>
wear a face of joy, and they are joyful. A hundred flat-
terers are ordered to attend, and they fill his ears with
praise. Beauty, all-commanding beauty, sues for admit-
tance, and scarcely receives an answer: even love itself
seems to wait upon fortune, or though the passion be only
feigned, yet it wears every appearance of sincerity; and
what greater pleasure can even true sincerity confer, or
what would the rich have more ?
Nothing can exceed the intended magnificence of the
bridegroom, but the costly dresses of the bride; six
eunuchs in the most sumptuous habits are to conduct him
to the nuptial couch, and wait his orders. Six ladies, in
all the magnificence of Persia, are directed to undress the
bride. Their business is to assist, to encourage her, to
divest her of every encumbering part of her dress, all but
the last covering, which, by an artful complication of
ribands, is purposely made difficult to unloose, and with
which she is to part reluctantly even to the joyful possessor
of her beauty.
Mostadad, O my father, is no philosopher; and yet he
seems perfectly contented with his ignorance. Possessed
of numberless slaves, camels, and women, he desires no
greater possession. He never opened the page of Mencius,
and yet all the slaves tell me that he is happy.
Forgive the weakness of my nature, if I sometimes feel
my heart rebellious to the dictates of wisdom, and eager
for happiness like his. Yet why wish for his wealth with
his ignorance ? to be like him, incapable of sentimental
pleasures, incapable of feeling the happiness of making
others happy, incapable of teaching the beautiful Zelis
philosophy ?
What! shall I in a transport of passion give up the
golden mean, the universal harmony, the unchanging
essence, for the possession of a hundred camels, as many
slaves, thirty-five beautiful horses, and seventy-three fine
women ? First blast me to the centre ! degrade me beneath
the most degraded! pare my nails, ye powers of Heaven!
ere I would stoop to such an exchange. What! part with
philosophy, which teaches me to suppress my passions in-
stead of gratifying them, which teaches me even to divest
my soul of passion, which teaches serenity in the midst of
<pb>
tortures ! philosophy, by which even now I am so very
serene, and so very much at ease, to be persuaded to part
with it for any other enjoyment! Never, never, even
though persuasion spoke in the accents of Zelis !
A female slave informs me, that the bride is to be arrayed
in a tissue of silver, and her hair adorned with the largest
peals of Ormus: but why tease you with particulars, in
which we both are so little concerned ? The pain I feel in
separation throws a gloom over my mind, which, in this
scene of universal joy, I fear may be attributed to some
other cause. How wretched are those who are, like me,
denied even the last resource of misery,—their tears.—
Adieu.
LETTER XXXVII.
From the Same.
THE CORRESPONDENCE STILL CONTINUED THE PHILO-
SOPHER'S SON BEGINS TO BE DISGUSTED IN THE PUR-
SUIT OF WISDOM—AN ALLEGORY TO PROVE ITS FUTI-
LITY.
I BEGIN to have doubts whether wisdom be alone suffi-
cient to make us happy: whether every step we make in
refinement is not an inlet into new disquietudes. A mind
too vigorous and active, serves only to consume the body
to which it is joined, as the richest jewels are soonest
found to wear their settings.
When we rise in knowledge, as the prospect widens the
objects of our regard become more obscure; and the un-
lettered peasant, whose views are only directed to the
narrow sphere around him, beholds Nature with a finer
relish, and tastes her blessings with a keener appetite,
than the philosopher whose mind attempts to grasp a
universal system.
As I was some days ago pursuing this subject among a
circle of my fellow-slaves, an ancient Gruebre1 of the
number, equally remarkable for his piety and wisdom,
1 The Guebres were the Persian Fire-worshippers, followers of
Zoroaster.—B,
<pb>
seemed touched with my conversation, and desired to illus-
trate what I had been saying with an allegory taken from
the Zendavesta of Zoroaster: " By this we shall be
taught," says he, " that they who travel in pursuit of wis-
dom, walk only in a circle; and after all their labour, at
last return to their pristine ignorance ; and in this also we
shall see, that enthusiastic confidence or unsatisfying
doubts terminate all our enquiries.
" In early times, before myriads of nations covered the
earth, the whole human race lived together in one valley.
The simple inhabitants, surrounded on every side by lofty
mountains, knew no other world but the little spot to
which they were confined. They fancied the heavens bent
down to meet the mountain tops, and formed an impene-
trable wall to surround them. None had ever yet ventured
to climb the steepy cliff, in order to explore those regions
that lay beyond it; they knew the nature of the skies
only from a tradition, which mentioned their being made
of adamant: traditions make up the reasonings of the
simple, and serve to silence every enquiry.
" In this sequestered vale, blessed with all the sponta-
neous productions of nature, the honeyed blossom, the
refreshing breeze, the gliding brook, and golden fruitage,
the simple inhabitants seemed happy in themselves, in
each other; they desired no greater pleasures, for they
knew of none greater; ambition, pride, and envy, were
vices unknown among them ; and from this peculiar sim-
plicity of its possessors, the country was called THE VALLEY
OF IGNORANCE.1
" At length, however, an unhappy youth, more aspiring
than the rest, undertook to climb the mountain's side,
and examine the summits, which were hitherto deemed
inaccessible. The inhabitants from below gazed with
wonder at his intrepidity; some applauded his courage,
others censured his folly; still, however, he proceeded
towards the place where the earth and heavens seemed to
unite, and at length arrived at the wished-for height with
extreme labour and assiduity.
1 Perhaps an idea or two here are traceable to Johnson's ' Kasselas,'
and its " Happy Valley," &e. ' Kasselas' was only lately published at
this time."—ED.
<pb>
" His first surprise was to find the skies, not as he ex-
pected within his reach, but still as far off as before. His
amazement increased when he saw a wide extended region
lying on the opposite side of the mountain ; but it rose to
astonishment when he beheld a country at a distance,
more beautiful and alluring than even that he had just
left behind.
" As he continued to gaze with wonder, a genius, with a
look of infinite modesty, approaching, offered to be his
guide and instructor. ' The distant country which you so
much admire,' says the angelic being,' is called the LAND
OF CERTAINTY : in that charming retreat, sentiment con-
tributes to refine every sensual banquet; the inhabitants
are blessed with every solid enjoyment, and still more
blessed in a perfect consciousness of their own felicity:
ignorance in that country is wholly unknown ; all there is
satisfaction without allay, for every pleasure first under-
goes the examination of reason. As for me I am called
the Genius of Demonstration, and am stationed here in
order to conduct every adventurer to that land of happi-
ness, through those intervening regions you see overhung
with fogs and darkness, and horrid with forests, cataracts,
caverns, and various other shapes of danger. But follow
me, and in time I may lead you to that distant desirable
land of tranquillity.'
" The intrepid traveller immediately put himself under
the direction of the Genius, and both journeying on
together with a slow but agreeable pace, deceived the
tediousness of the way by conversation. The beginning
of the journey seemed to promise true satisfaction, but as
they proceeded forward, the skies became more gloomy
and the way more intricate ; they often inadvertently ap-
proached the brow of some frightful precipice, or the brink
of a torrent, and were obliged to measure back their former
way: the gloom increasing as they proceeded, their pace
became more slow; they paused at every step, frequently
stumbled, and their distrust and timidity increased. The
Genius of Demonstration now therefore advised his pupil
to grope upon hands and feet, as a method, though more
slow, yet less liable to error.
" In this manner they attempted to pursue their journey
<pb>
for some time, when they were overtaken by another
Genius, who with a precipitate pace seemed travelling the
same way. He was instantly known by the other to be
the Genius of Probability.1 He wore two wide extended
wings at his back, which incessantly waved, without in-
creasing the rapidity of his motion; his countenance
betrayed a confidence that the ignorant might mistake for
sincerity, and he had but one eye, which was fixed in the
middle of his forehead.
" ' Servant of Hormizda,'2 cried he, approaching the
mortal pilgrim, " if thou art travelling to the LAND OF
CERTAINTY, how is it possible to arrive there under the
guidance of a Genius who proceeds forward so slowly, and
is so little acquainted with the way ? Follow me, we shall
soon perform the journey to where every pleasure waits
our arrival.'
" The peremptory tone in which this Genius spoke, and
the speed with which he moved forward, induced the
traveller to change his conductor, and leaving his modest
companion behind, he proceeded forward with his more
confident director, seeming not a little pleased at the
increased velocity of his motion.
" But soon he found reason to repent. Whenever a
torrent crossed their way, his guide taught him to despise
the obstacle by plunging him in; whenever a precipice
presented, he was directed to fling himself forward. Thus
each moment miraculously escaping, his repeated escapes
only served to increase his temerity. He led him, there-
fore, forward, amidst infinite difficulties, till they arrived
at the borders of an ocean, which appeared unnavigable
from the black mist that lay upon its surface. Its unquiet
waves were of the darkest hue, and gave a lively represen-
tation of the various agitations of the human mind.
" The Genius of Probability now confessed his temerity
—owned his being an improper guide to the LAND OF
CERTAINTY, a country where no mortal had ever been per-
mitted to arrive; but, at the same time, offered to supply
the traveller with another conductor, who should carry him
1 It is the Genius of Presumption in the Public Ledger.—ED.
2 The Persian Magi believed in two great Deities, Hormizda, or
Oromasdes, the good principle, and Arimanes the evil principle.—B.
<pb>
to the LAND OF CONFIDENCE, a region where the inhabi-
tants lived with the utmost tranquillity, and tasted almost
as much satisfaction as if in the Land of Certainty. Not
waiting for a reply, he stamped three times on the ground,
and called forth the Demon of Error, a gloomy fiend of
the servants of Arimanes. The yawning earth gave up
the reluctant savage, who seemed unable to bear the light
of the day. His stature was enormous, his colour black
and hideous, his aspect betrayed a thousand varying pas-
sions, and he spread forth pinions that were fitted for the
most rapid flight. The traveller at first was shocked at
the spectre ; but, finding him obedient to a superior power,
he assumed his former tranquillity.
"' I have called you to duty,' cries the Genius to the
Demon,' to bear on your back a son of mortality over the
OCEAN or DOUBTS, into the LAND OF CONFIDENCE ; I expect
you will perform your commission with punctuality. And
as for you,' continued the Genius, addressing the traveller,
' when once I have bound this fillet round your eyes, let
no voice of persuasion, nor threats the most terrifying, per-
suade you to unbind it in order to look round; keep the
fillet fast, look not at the ocean below, and you may cer-
tainly expect to arrive at a region of pleasure.'
" Thus saying, and the traveller's eyes being covered,
the Demon, muttering curses, raised him on his back, and
instantly, upborne by his strong pinions, directed his
flight among the clouds. Neither the loudest thunder, nor
the most angry tempest, could persuade the traveller to
unbind his eyes. The Demon directed his flight down-
wards, and skimmed the surface of the ocean; a thousand
voices, some with loud invectives, others in the sarcastic
tones of contempt, vainly endeavoured to persuade him to
look round; but he still continued to keep his eyes
covered, and would, in all probability, have arrived at the
happy land, had not flattery effected what other means
could not perform. For now he heard himself welcomed
on every side to the promised land, and a universal shout
of joy was sent forth at his safe arrival. The wearied
traveller, desirous of seeing the long wished for country,
at length pulled the fillet from his eyes, and ventured
to look round him. But he had unloosed the band
<pb>
too soon; he was not yet above half way over. The
Demon, who was still hovering in the air, and had pro-
duced those sounds only in order to deceive, was now freed
from his commission ; wherefore, throwing the astonished
traveller from his back, the unhappy youth fell headlong
into the subjacent Ocean of Doubts, from whence he never
after was seen to rise." '
LETTEE XXXVIII.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President of
the Ceremonial Academy at Pekin in China?
THE CHINESE PHILOSOPHER PBAISES THE JUSTICE OF A
LATE SENTENCE, AND INSTANCES THE INJUSTICE OF
THE KING OF FRANCE IN THE CASE OF THE PRINCE OF
CHAROLAIS.
WHEN Parmeuio, the Grecian, had done something which
excited a universal shout from the surrounding multitude,
he was instantly struck with the doubt, that what had
their approbation must certainly be wrong; and turning
to a philosopher who stood near him, " Pray, sir," says
he, " pardon me ; I fear I have been guilty of some ab-
surdity."
You know that I am, not less than him, a despiser of the
multitude; you know that I equally detest flattery to the
great; yet so many circumstances have concurred to give
a lustre to the latter part of the present English monarch's3
reign, that I cannot withhold my contribution of praise ; I
cannot avoid the acknowledging the crowd, for once, just
in their unanimous approbation.
Yet think not that battles gained, dominion extended,
1 The Public Ledger version has an additional paragraph, thus:—
" The Zendavesta observes, that had he held fast to the genius of Error,
he would have been carried to the Land of Confidence, which is but
another name for the Valley of Ignorance, from whence he had
travelled."—ED.
» Dated May 19, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—Eo.
3 George II. He died a few months later, aged seventy-seven.—ED.
<pb>
or enemies brought to submission, are the virtues which
at present claim my admiration.1 Were the reigning mon-
arch only famous for his victories, I should regard his
character with indifference : the boast of heroism in this
enlightened age is justly regarded as a qualification of a,
very subordinate rank, and mankind now begin to look
with becoming horror on these foes to man. The virtue
in this aged monarch which I have at present in view, is
one of a much more exalted nature, is one of the most dif-
ficult of attainment, is the least praised of all kingly vir-
tues, and yet deserves the greatest praise; the virtue I
mean is JUSTICE,—a strict administration of justice, with-
out severity and without favour.
Of all virtues this is the most difficult to be practised
by a king who has a power to pardon. All men, even
tyrants themselves, lean to mercy when unbiassed by pas-
sions or interest; the heart naturally persuades to forgive-
ness, and pursuing the dictates of this pleasing deceiver,
we are led to prefer our private satisfaction to public
utility. What a thorough love for the public, what a
strong command over the passions, what a finely conducted
judgment must he possess, who opposes the dictates of
reason to those of his heart, and prefers the future interest
of his people to his own immediate satisfaction !
If still, to a man's own natural bias for tenderness, we
add the numerous solicitations made by a criminal's friends
for mercy; if we survey a king not only opposing his own
feelings, but reluctantly refusing those he regards, and
this to satisfy the public, whose cries he may never heai',
whose gratitude he may never receive, this surely is true
greatness ! Let us fancy ourselves for a moment in this
just old man's place, surrounded by numbers, all solicit-
ing the same favour—a favour that nature disposes us to
grant where the inducements to pity are laid before us in
the strongest light, suppliants at our feet, some ready to
resent a refusal, none opposing a compliance; let us, I
say, suppose ourselves in such a situation, and I fancy we
should find ourselves more apt to act the character of good-
natured men than of upright magistrates.
1 The battles culminating in the acquisition of Canada were amongst
the latest of these victqries.—ED.
<pb>
What contributes to raise justice above all other kingly
virtues is, that it is seldom attended with a due share of
applause, and those who practise it must be influenced by
greater motives than empty fame: the people are gene-
rally well pleased with a remission of punishment, and all
that wears the appearance of humanity; it is the wise
alone who are capable of discerning that impartial justice
is the truest mercy: they know it to be very difficult, at
once to compassionate, and yet condemn, an object that
pleads for tenderness.
I have been led into this commonplace train of thought
by a late striking instance in this country of the impar-
tiality of justice, and of the king's inflexible resolution of
inflicting punishment where it was justly due. A man
of the first quality,1 in a fit, either of passion, melancholy,
or madness, murdered his servant: it was expected that
his station in life would have lessened the ignominy of his
punishment; however, he was arraigned, condemned, and
underwent the same degrading death with the meanest
malefactor. It was well considered that virtue alone is
true nobility ; and that he whose . actions sink him even
beneath the vulgar, has no right to those distinctions
which should be the rewards only of merit: it was per-
haps considered that crimes were more heinous among the
higher classes of people, as necessity exposes them to fewer
temptations.
Over all the East, even China not excepted, a person of
the same quality, guilty of such a crime, might, by giving
up a share of his fortune to the judge, buy off his sen-
1 Earl Ferrers, who shot his land-steward, Mr. Johnston, was tried by
his peers, and found guilty of mur'der, for which he was hanged at
Tyburn, May 5, 1760. He had manifested very decided proofs of in-
sanity, both before and at the time of committing this fatal act, but he
behaved with the greatest composure at his trial and execution. His
conduct upon this last occasion is noticed by Horace Walpole in his
' Correspondence :'—" The extraordinary history of Lord Ferrers is
closed: he was executed yesterday. Madness, that in other countries
is a disorder, is here a systematic character: it does not hinder people
from forming a plan of conduct, and from even dying agreeably to
it. ... He shamed heroes. . . . He went in his wedding clothes ;
marking the only remaining impression on his mind. . . . The mob was
decent, and admired him, and almost pitied him."—B. [Vide Walpole's
letter to Mann, May 6, 1760. See also post, p. 170.—ED.]
IIT. L
<pb>
tence. There are several countries, even in Europe, where
the servant is entirely the property of his master: if a
slave kills his lord, he dies by the most excruciating tor-
tures ; but if the circumstances are reversed, a small fine
buys off the punishment of the offender. Happy the
country where all are equal, and where those who sit as
judges have too much integrity to receive a bribe, and too
much honour to pity, from a similitude of the prisoner's
title or circumstances with their own ! Such is England:
yet think not that it was always equally famed for this
strict impartiality. There was a time, even here, when
title softened the rigours of the law, when dignified
wretches were suffered to live, and continue for years an
equal disgrace to justice and nobility.
To this day, in a neighbouring country, the great are
often most scandalously pardoned for the most scandalous
offences. A person1 is still alive among them who has
more than once deserved the most ignominious severity of
justice. His being of the blood royal, however, was
thought a sufficient atonement for his being a disgrace to
humanity. This remarkable personage took pleasure in
shooting at the passengers below from the top of his
palace; and in this most princely amusement he usually
spent some time every day. He was at length arraigned
by the friends of a person whom in this manner he had
killed, was found guilty of the charge, and condemned to
die. His merciful monarch pardoned him, in consideration
of his rank and quality. The unrepenting criminal soon
after renewed his usual entertainment, and in the same
manner killed another man. He was a second time con-
demned ; and, strange to think, a second time received
his majesty's pardon! Would you believe it ? A third
time the very same man was guilty of the very same of-
fence ; a third time, therefore, the laws of his country
found him guilty—I wish, for the honour of humanity, I
could suppress the rest—A third time he was pardoned !
Will you not think such a story too extraordinary for be-
1 The Prince of Charolais.—B. [Louis XV. is reported to have told
this criminal, when he came to ask grace for one of his wanton murders,
that the pardon of whoever should kill him (the supplicant) would be
more readily granted.—ED.]
<pb>
lief ? will you not think me describing the savage inhabi-
tants of Congo ? Alas ! the story is but too true ; and the
country where it was transacted, regards itself as the
politest in Europe ! Adieu.
LETTER XXXIX.
From Lien Chi Altangi to , Merchant in Amsterdam.
THE DESCRIPTION OF TRUE POLITENESS TWO LETTERS
OF DIFFERENT COUNTRIES, BY LADIES FALSELY THOUGHT
POLITE AT HOME.
CEREMONIES are different in every country; but true
politeness is everywhere the same. Ceremonies, which
take up so much of our attention, are only artificial helps
which ignorance assumes in order to imitate politeness,
which is the result of good sense and good nature. A
person possessed of those qualities, though he had never seen
a court, is truly agreeable; and if without them, would
continue a clown though he had been all his life a gentle-
man usher.
How would a Chinese, bred up in the formalities of an
Eastern court, be regarded, should he carry all his good
manners beyond the Great Wall ? How would an English-
man, skilled in all the decorums of Western good breeding,
appear at an Eastern entertainment ? Would he not be
reckoned more fantastically savage than even his unbred
footman ?
Ceremony resembles that base coin which circulates
through a country by the royal mandate; it serves every
purpose of real money at home, but is entirely useless if
-carried abroad: a person who should attempt to circulate
his native trash in another country, would be thought
either ridiculous or culpable. He is truly well-bred, who
knows when to value and when to despise those national
peculiarities which are regarded by some with so much
observance ; a traveller of taste at once perceives that the
wise are polite all the world over, but that fools are polite
-only at home.
<pb>
I have now before me two very fashionable letters upon
the same subject, both written by ladies of distinction;
one of whom leads the fashion in England, and the other
sets the ceremonies of China: they are both regarded in
their respective countries, by all the beau monde, as stan-
dards of taste, and models of true politeness, and both
give us a true idea of what they imagine elegant in their
admirers: which of them understands true politeness, or
whether either, you shall be at liberty to determine. The
English lady writes thus to her female confidant:—
BELINDA TO CHARLOTTE.
" As I live, my dear Charlotte, I believe the Colonel will
carry it at last; he is a most irresistible fellow, that is flat.
So well dressed, so neat, so sprightly, and plays about one
so agreeably, that I vow, he has as much spirits as the
Marquis of Monkey man's Italian greyhound. I first saw
him at Kanelagh ; he shines there : he is nothing without
Eanelagh, and Eanelaghl nothing without him. The next
day, he sent a card and compliments, desiring to wait on
mamma and me to the music subscription. He looked all
the time with such irresistible impudence, that positively
he had something in his face gave me as much pleasure as
a pair-royal of naturals in my own hand.2 He waited on
mamma and me the next morning to know how we got
home: you must know the insidious devil makes love to
us both. Eap went the footman at the door; bounce went
my heart: I thought he would have rattled the house
down. Chariot drove up to the window, with its footmen.
1 Banelagh Gardens, Chelsea, one of the rivals of Vauxhall, in its
early and most fashionable days. Walpole tells of the opening, in 1742,
when the " Prince and Princess, much nobility, and much mob besides,
were there." " There is a vast amphitheatre, freely gilded," writes
Walpole, " painted, and illuminated, into which everybody that loves
eating, drinking, staring, and crowding is admitted for 12d. The build-
ing and disposition of the gardens cost £16,000." On the occasion of the
"jubilee masquerade" here, in honour of the peace, 1769, Walpole
again writes of the gardens, saying that the entertainment was " the
prettiest thing I ever saw." Ranelagh was adjacent to, or partly on
the site of the present garden of Chelsea Hospital.—ED.
2 This signifies a "good hand" at basset (card game).—ED.
<pb>
in the prettiest liveries : he has infinite taste, that is flat.
Mamma had spent all the morning at her head : but for
my part I was in an undress to receive him ; quite easy,
mind that; no -way disturbed at his approach: mamma
pretended to be as degagee as I; and yet I saw her blnsh
in spite of her. Positively he is a most killing devil! We
did nothing but laugh all the time he staid with us ; I
never heard so many very good things before : at first he
mistook mamma for my sister, at which she laughed; then
he mistook my natural complexion for paint, at which I
laughed ; and then he showed us a picture in the lid
of his snuff-box, at which we all laughed. He plays
picquet so very ill, and is so very fond of cards, and loses
with such a grace, that positively he has won me ; I have
.got a cool hundred, but have lost my heart. I need not
tell you that he is only a colonel of the train-bauds. I am,
.dear Charlotte, yours for ever, BELINDA."
The Chinese lady addresses her confidant, a poor rela-
tion of the family, upon the same occasion; in which she
seems to understand decorums even better than the Wes-
tern beauty. You, who have resided so long in China, will
readily acknowledge the picture to be taken from nature;
and, by being acquainted with the Chinese customs, will
better apprehend the lady's meaning.
FROM YAOUA TO YAYA.
" PAPA insists upon one, two, three, four hundred taels
from the colonel, my lover, before he parts with a lock of
my hair. Ho,1 how I wish the dear creature may be able
to produce the money, and pay papa my fortune! The
colonel is reckoned the politest man in all Shensi. The
first visit he paid at our house—mercy, what stooping, and
cringing, and stopping, and fidgeting, and going back, and
creeping forward, there was between him and papa! one
would have thought he had got the seventeen books of
ceremonies all by heart. When he was come into the hall,
1 This exclamation is printed throughout the letter " Ho" in the
early editions, but some late editors alter it to " Oh."—Ki>.
<pb>
he flourished his hands three times in a very gracefui
manner. Papa, who would not be outdone, flourished his
four times ; upon this the colonel began again, and both
thus continued flourishing for some minutes in the politest
manner imaginable. I was posted in the usual place be-
hind the screen, where I saw the whole ceremony through
a slit. Of this the colonel was sensible, for papa informed
him. I would have given the world to have shown him
my little shoes, but had no opportunity. It was the first
time I had ever the happiness of seeing any man but papa,
and I vow, my dear Yaya, I thought my three souls would
actually have fled from my lips. Ho, but he looked most
charmingly; he is reckoned the best shaped man in the
whole province, for he is very fat and very short; but even
those natural advantages are improved by his dress, which
is fashionable past description. His head was close shaven,
all but the crown, and the hair of that was braided into a
most beautiful tail, that reaching down to his heels, was
terminated by a bunch of yellow roses.1 Upon his first
entering the room, I could easily perceive he had been
highly perfumed with assafoetida. But then his looks—•
his looks, my dear Yaya, were irresistible. He kept his.
eyes steadfastly fixed on the wall during the whole cere-
mony, and I sincerely believe no accident could have dis-
composed his gravity, or drawn his eyes away. After a.
polite silence of two hours, he gallantly begged to have
the singing women introduced, purely for my amusement.
After one of them had for some time entertained us with
her voice, the colonel and she retired for some minutes
together. I thought they would never have come back : I
must own he is a most agreeable creature. Upon his re-
turn, they again renewed the concert, and he continued to
1 Sir John F. Davis has the following description of a lover in his trans-
lation of' Hung-how-Mung,' or ' The Ked Chamber Dreams,' a Chinese
novel:—" His beautiful nose was full and round, like the gall-bladder
of a quadruped ; and he had a face like the moon in the midst of
autumn: from his head to the end of his tail, which dangled to the-
ancles, hung four strings of precious stones set in gold. His upper
tunic was pink spangled with flowers, his trowsers and stockings were-
embroidered, and his shoes were of a deep red colour, with thick white
soles: ten thousand thoughts of love were collected in the corner of his.
eye." Vide Prior's edition of the ' Citizen,' p. 158.—ED.
<pb>
gaze upon the wall as usual, when, in less than half an
hour more, ho! but he retired out of the room with
another. He is, indeed, a most agreeable creature.
" When he came to take his leave, the whole ceremony
began afresh; papa would see him to the door, but the
colonel swore he would rather see the earth turned upside
down than permit him to stir a single step, and papa was
at last obliged to comply. As soon as he was got to the
door, papa went out to see him on horseback: here they
continued half an hour bowing and cringing, before one
would mount or the other go in, but the colonel was at
last victorious. He had scarce gone an hundred paces
from the house, when papa running out hallooed after
him, " A good journey! " upon which the colonel returned,
and would see papa into his house before ever he would
depart. He was no sooner got home than he sent me a
very fine present of duck eggs painted of twenty different
colours. His generosity, I own, has won me. I have ever
since been trying over the eight letters of good fortune,
and have great hopes.1 All I have to apprehend is, that
after he has married me, and that I am carried to his
house close shut up in my chair, when he comes to have
the first sight of my face, he may shut me up a second
time, and send me back to papa. However I shall appear
as fine as possible: mamma and I have been to buy the
clothes for my wedding. I am to have a new fong whang2
in my hair, the beak of which will reach down to my nose;
the milliner from whom we bought that and our ribands
cheated us as if she had no conscience, and so to quiet
mine I cheated her. All this is fair you know. I remain,
my dear Yaya, your ever faithful, " YAOTIA."
1 " The pa-ktta, or eight mystical diagrams of Fo-hy." These, Sir
J. F. Davis says ('Chinese,' 1836, vol. ii., p. 135), "cut in stone or
metal, are often worn as charms."—ED.
" The foong hodng, or Chinese phu2nix, an ornament of gold and
jewels. See DA vis's Chinese, vol. i., p. 337 (edit. 1836); also the story of
Prince Bonbenin-bonbobbin-bonbobbinet and his White Mouse, in Letter
XLVIII.—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE XL.
From Lien Chi Altangi to Fwm Hoam.
THE ENGLISH STILL HAVE POETS, THOUGH NOT
VEBSIFIEBS.1
You have always testified the highest esteem for the
English poets, and thought them not inferior to the
Greeks, Romans, or even the Chinese, in the art. But it
is now thought, even by the English themselves, that the
race of their poets is extinct; every day produces some
pathetic exclamation upon the decadence of taste and
genius. "Pegasus," say they, "has slipped the bridle
from his mouth, and our modern bards attempt to direct
his flight by catching him by the tail."
Yet, my friend, it is only among the ignorant that such
discourses prevail; men of true discernment can see several
poets still among the English, some of whom equal, if not
surpass, their predecessors. The ignorant term that alone
poetry which is couched in a certain number of syllables in
every line, where a vapid thought is drawn out into a num-
ber of verses of equal length, and perhaps pointed with
rhymes at the end. But glowing sentiment, striking
imagery, concise expression, natural description, and
modulated periods, are full[y] sufficient entirely to fill up
my idea of this art, and make way to every passion.
If my idea of poetry, therefore, be just, the English are
not at present so destitute of poetical merit as they seem
to imagine. I can see several poets in disguise among
them,—men furnished with that strength of soul, sub-
limity of sentiment, and grandeur of expression, which
constitute the character. Many of the writers of their
modern odes, sonnets, tragedies, or rebuses, it is true,
deserve not the name, though they have done nothing but
clink rhymes and measure syllables for years together:
1 Dated May 26, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
their Johnsons and Smollettsl are truly poets; though, for
ought I know, they never made a single verse in their
whole lives.
In every incipient language, the poet and the prose
writer are very distinct in their qualifications: the poet
«ver proceeds first; treading unbeaten paths, enriching
his native sounds, and employed in new adventures. The
other follows with more cautious steps, and though slow
in his motions, treasures up every useful or pleasing dis-
covery. But when once all the extent and the force of the
language is known, the poet then seems to rest from his
labour, and is at length overtaken by his assiduous pur-
.suer. Both characters are then blended into one: the
historian and orator catch all the poet's fire, and leave
him no real mark of distinction, except the iteration of
numbers regularly returning. Thus, in the decline of
ancient European learning, Seneca, though he wrote in
prose, is as much a poet as Lucan, and Longinus, though
but a critic, more sublime than Apollonius.
From this, then, it appears that poetry is not discon-
tinued, but altered among the English at present; the
outward form seems different from what it was, but poe-
try still continues internally the same : the only question
remains, whether the metric feet used by the good writers
.of the last age, or the prosaic numbers employed by the
good writers of this, be preferable. And here the practice
.of the last age appears to me superior. They submitted
to the restraint of numbers and similar sounds ; and this
restraint, instead of diminishing, augmented the force of
their sentiment and style. Fancy restrained may be com-
pared to a fountain, which plays highest by diminishing
the aperture. Of the truth of this maxim in every lan-
.guage, every fine writer is perfectly sensible from his own
experience, and yet to explain the reason would be per-
1 Of course Goldsmith must have known that Johnson had published
his 'London' in 1738, and his ' Vanity of Human Wishes'in 1749,
and that Smollett had published his'Tears of Scotland' in 1746. By
making bis Chinese, however, acquainted with Johnson and Smollett as
eminent writers, and yet ignorant of their poetry, he very cleverly
insinuates that the poetical work of these authors was already almost
forgotten.—ED.
<pb>
haps as difficult as to make a frigid genius profit by the
discovery.
There is still another reason in favour of the practice of
the last age, to be drawn from the variety of modulation.
The musical period in prose is confined to a very few
changes; the numbers in verse are capable of infinite
variation. I speak not now from the practice of modern
verse writers, few of whom have any idea of musical
variety, but run on in the same monotonous flow through
the whole poem; but rather from the example of their
former poets, who were tolerable masters of this variety,
and also from a capacity in the language of still admitting
various unanticipated music.
Several rules have been drawn up for varying the poetic
measure, and critics have elaborately talked of accents and
syllables; but good sense and a fine ear, which rules can
never teach, are what alone can in such a case determine.
The rapturous Sowings of joy, or the interruptions of in-
dignation, require accents placed entirely different, and a
structure consonant to the emotions they would express.
Changing passions, and numbers changing with those
passions, make the whole secret of Western as well as
Eastern poetry. In a word, the great faults of the modern
.professed Euglisn poets are, that they seem to want
numbers which should vary with the passion, and are more
employed in describing to the imgination than striking at
the heart.
LETTER XLI.
To the Same.
THE BEHAVIOUR OF THE CONGREGATION IN ST. PAUI/S
CHURCH AT PRAYERS.
SOME time since I sent thee, O holy disciple of Confucius,
an account of the grand abbey, or mausoleum, of the kings
and heroes of this nation: I have since been introduced to
a temple, not so ancient, but far superior in beauty and
magnificence. In this, which is the most considerable of
<pb>
the empire, there are no pompous inscriptions, no flattery
paid the dead, but all is elegant and awfully simple. There
are, however, a few rags hung round the walls, which have,
at a vast expense, been taken from the enemy in the
present war. The silk of which they are composed, when
new, might be valued at half a string of copper money in
China; yet this wise people fitted out a fleet and an army
in order to seize them, though now grown old, and scarcely
capable of being patched up into a handkerchief. By this
conquest, the English are said to have gained, and the
French to have lost, much honour. Is the honour of
European nations placed only in tattered silk ?
In this temple I was permitted to remain during the
whole service; and were you not already acquainted with
the religion of the English, you might, from my descrip-
tion, be inclined to believe them as grossly idolatrous as
the disciples of.Lao. The idol which they seem to address,
strides like a colossus over the door of the inner temple,
which here, as with the Jews, is esteemed the most sacred
part of the building. Its oracles are delivered in a
hundred various tones, which seem to inspire the wor-
shippers with enthusiasm and awe : an old woman, who
appeared to be the priestess, was employed iii various
attitudes, as she felt the inspiration. When it began to
speak, all the people remained fixed in silent attention,
nodding assent, looking approbation, appearing highly
edified by those sounds which to a stranger might seem
inarticulate and unmeaning.
When the idol had done speaking, and the priestess had
locked up its lungs with a key, observing almost all the
company leaving the temple, I concluded the service was
over, and taking my hat, was going to walk away with the
crowd, when I was stopped by the man in black, who
assured me that the ceremony had scarcely yet begun!
" What!" cried I, " do I not see almost the whole body
of the worshippers leaving the church ? Would you per-
suade me that such numbers who profess religion and
morality, would, in this shameless manner, quit the temple
before the service was concluded ? You surely mistake :
not even the Kalmucks would be guilty of such an in-
decency, though all the object of their worship was but a
"
<pb>
joint-stool." My friend seemed to blush for his country-
men, assuring me that those whom I saw running away,
were only a parcel of musical blockheads, whose passion
was merely for sounds, and whose heads are as empty as a
fiddle-case: those who remained behind, says he, are the
true religious; they make use of music to warm their
hearts, and to lift them to a proper pitch of rapture:
examine their behaviour, and you will confess there are
some among us who practise true devotion.
I now looked round me as directed, but saw nothing of
that fervent devotion which he had promised : one of the
worshippers appeared to be ogling the company through
a glass ; another was fervent, not in addresses to Heaven,
but to his mistress; a third whispered, a fourth took snuff,
and the priest himself, in a drowsy tone, read over the
duties of the day.
" Bless my eyes ! " cried I, as I happened to look to-
wards the door, " what do I see ? one of the worshippers
fallen fast asleep, and actually sunk down on his cushion !
Is he now enjoying the benefit of a trance, or does he
receive the influence of some mysterious vision ?"—
" Alas! alas ! " replied my companion, " no such thing ;
he has only had the misfortune of eating too hearty a
dinner, and finds it impossible to keep his eyes open."
Turning to another part of the temple, I perceived a
young lady just in the same circumstances and attitude :
" Strange," criedl; " can she,too,have over-eaten herself? "
—" Oh, fie !" replied my friend," you now grow censorious.
She grow drowsy from eating too much ! that would be
profanation ! She only sleeps now from having sat up all
night at a brag party."—" Turn me where I will, then," says
I, " I can perceive no single symptom of devotion among
the worshippers, except from that old woman in the corner,
who sits groaning behind the long sticks of a mourning
fan; she indeed seems greatly edified with what she
hears."—" Ay," replied my friend," I knew we should find
some to catch you ; I know her; that is the deaf lady who
lives in the cloisters."
In short, the remissness of behaviour in almost all the
worshippers, and some even of the guardians, struck me
with surprise. I had been taught to believe that none
<pb>
were ever promoted to offices in the temple, but men
remarkable for their superior sanctity, learning, and recti-
tude ; that there was no such thing heard of, as persons
being introduced into the church merely to oblige a
senator, or provide for the younger branch of a noble
family: I expected, as their minds were continually set
upon heavenly things, to see their eyes directed there
also; and hoped, from their behaviour, to perceive their
inclinations corresponding with their duty. But I am
since informed, that some are appointed to preside over
temples they never visit; and, while they receive all the
money, are contented with letting others do all the good.
Adieu.
LETTER XLII.
From Fum Hoam, to Lien Chi Altangi, the Discontented
Wanderer, by the way of Moscow. .
THE HISTOBY OF CHINA MORE REPLETE WITH GREAT
ACTIONS THAN THAT OF EUROPE.
MUST I ever continue to condemn thy perseverance, and
blame that curiosity which destroys thy happiness ? What
yet untasted banquet, what luxury yet unknown, has re-
warded thy painful adventures ? Name a pleasure which
thy native country could not amply procure: frame a
wish that might not have been satisfied in China! Why
then such toil, and such danger, in pursuit of raptures
within your reach at home ?
The Europeans, you will say, excel us in sciences and
in arts,—those sciences which bound the aspiring wish,
and those arts which tend to gratify even unrestrained
desire. They may perhaps outdo us in the arts of build-
ing ships, casting cannons, or measuring mountains ; but
are they superior in the greatest of all arts,—the art of
governing kindoms and ourselves ?
When I compare the history of China with that of
Europe, how do I exult in being a native of that kingdom
which derives its original from the sun! Upon opening
<pb>
the Chinese history, I there behold an ancient, extended
empire, established by laws which nature and reason seem
to have dictated. The duty of children to their parents—
a duty which nature implants in every breast—forms
the strength of that government which has subsisted for
time immemorial. Filial obedience is the first and greatest
requisite of a state: by this we become good subjects to
our emperors, capable of behaving with just subordination
to our superiors, and grateful dependents on Heaven; by
this we become fonder of marriage, in order to be capable
of exacting obedience from others in our turn ; by this we
become good magistrates, for early submission is the
truest lesson to those who would learn to rule. By this
the whole state may be said to resemble one family, of
which the Emperor is the protector, father, and friend.
In this happy region, sequestered from the rest of man-
kind, I see a succession of princes who in general con-
sidered themselves as the fathers of their people ; a race
of philosophers who bravely combated idolatry, prejudice,
and tyranny, at the expense of their private happiness and
immediate reputation. Whenever a usurper or a tyrant
intruded into the administration, how have all the good
and great been united against him! Can European
history produce an instance like that of the twelve
mandarines, who all resolved to apprize the vicious
Emperor Tisiang of the irregularity of his conduct ? He
who first undertook the dangerous task was cut in two by
the emperor's order; the second was ordered to be tor-
mented, and then put to a cruel death ; the third under-
took the task with intrepidity, and was instantly stabbed
by the tyrant's hand: in this manner they all suffered,
except one. But, not to be turned from his purpose, the
brave survivor entering the palace with the instruments
of torture in his hand, " Here," cried he, addressing him-
self to the throne, " here, O Tisiang, are the marks your
faithful subjects receive for their loyalty; I am wearied
with serving a tyrant, and now come for my reward."
The Emperor, struck with his intrepidity, instantly forgave
the boldness of his conduct, and reformed his own. What
European annals can boast of a tyrant thus reclaimed to
lenity ?
<pb>
When five brethren had set upon the great Emperor
Oinsong alone, with his sabre he slew four of them; he
was struggling with the fifth, when his guards coming up
were going to cut the conspirator into a thousand pieces.
" No, no," cried the Emperor, with a calm and placid
countenance, " of all his brothers he is the only one re-
maining, at least let one of the family be suffered to live,
that his aged parents may have somebody left to feed and
comfort them."
When Haitong, the last Emperor of the house of Ming,
saw himself besieged in his own city by the usurper, he
was resolved to issue from his palace with six hundred of
his guards, and give the enemy battle ; but they forsook
him. Being thus without hopes, and choosing death
rather than to fall alive into the hands of a rebel, he
retired to his garden, conducting his little daughter, an
only child, in his hand; there, in a private arbour, un-
sheathing his sword, he stabbed the young innocent to the
heart, and then despatching himself left the following
words written with his blood on the border of his vest:
" Forsaken by my subjects, abandoned by my friends, use
my body as you will, but spare, O spare my people! "
An empire which has thus continued invariably the
same for such a long succession of ages—which, though
at last conquered by the Tartars, still preserves its ancient
laws and learning, and may more properly be said to
annex the dominions of Tartary to its empire, than to
admit a foreign conqueror—an empire as large as
Europe, governed by one law, acknowledging subjec-
tion to one prince, and experiencing but one revolu-
tion of any continuance in the space of four thousand
years,—this is something so peculiarly great, that I am
naturally led to despise all other nations on the com-
parison. Here we see no religious persecutions, no enmity
between mankind for difference in opinion. The disciples
of Lao Kium,1 the idolatrous sectaries of Fohi, and the
philosophical children of Confucius, only strive to show
by their actions the truth of their doctrines.
Now turn from this happy, peaceful scene, to Europe,
1 Laou-keun, the Chinese Epicurus. (Jride Davis, vol. ii., p. 109.)—
ED.
<pb>
the theatre of intrigue, avarice, and ambition. How
many revolutions does it not experience in the compass
even of one age ! and to what do these revolutions tend but
the destruction of 'thousands? Every great event is re-
plete with some new calamity. The seasons of serenity
are passed over in silence; their histories seem to speak
only of the storm.
There we see the Romans extending their power over
barbarous nations, and in turn become a prey to those
whom they had conquered. We see those barbarians,
when become Christians, engaged in continual war with
the followers of Mahomet; or, more dreadful still, de-
stroying each other. We see councils in the earlier ages
authorizing every iniquity—crusades spreading desolation
in the country left, as well as that to be conquered—ex-
communications freeing subjects from natural allegiance,
and persuading to sedition—blood flowing in the fields and
on scaffolds—tortures used as arguments to convince the re-
cusant : to heighten the horror of the piece, behold it shaded
with wars, rebellions, treasons, plots, politics, and poison.
And what advantage has any country of Europe ob-
tained from such calamities? Scarce any. Their dis-
sensions, for more than a thousand years, have served to
make each other unhappy, but have enriched none. All
the great nations still nearly preserve their ancient limits ;
none have been able to subdue the other, and so terminate
the dispute. France, in spite of the conquests of Edward
the Third and Henry the Fifth, notwithstanding the
efforts of Charles the Fifth and Philip the Second, still
remains within its ancient limits. Spain, Germany, Great
Britain, Poland,1 the States of the North, are nearly still
the same. What effect, then, has the blood of so many
thousands, the destruction of so many cities, produced ?
Nothing either great or considerable. The Christian
princes have lost, indeed, much from the enemies of
Christendom, but they have gained nothing from each
other. Their princes, because they preferred ambition to
justice, deserve the character of enemies to mankind ;
and their priests, by neglecting morality for opinion, have
mistaken the interests of society.
1 The first partition of Poland occurred in 1772.—ED.
<pb>
On whatever side we regard the history of Europe, we
shall perceive it to be a tissue of crimes, follies, and mis-
fortunes—of politics without design, and wars without
consequence. In this long list of human infirmity, a
great character, or a shining virtue, may sometimes
happen to arise, as we often meet a cottage or a cultivated
spot in the most hideous wilderness. But for an Alfred,
an Alphonso, a Frederick, or one Alexander III., we meet
a thousand princes who have disgraced humanity.
LETTER XLIII.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President, &c.
AN APOSTROPHE ON THE SUPPOSED DEATH OF
VOLTAIRE.
WE have just received accounts here, that Voltaire, the
poet and philosopher of Europe, is dead ! ' He is now
beyond the reach of the thousand enemies who, while
living, degraded his writings, and branded his character.
Scarce a page of his latter productions, that does not
betray the agonies of a heart bleeding under the scourge
of unmerited reproach. Happy, therefore, at last, in
escaping from calumny! happy in leaving a world that
was unworthy of him and his writings !2
1 This was a false report: Voltaire did not die till 1778. The date
of this Letter, in the Public Ledger, was June 3, 1760.—ED.
2 The eulogium which the author passes on Voltaire's intellectual
powers, every candid mind must acknowledge to be just—though it is
to be regretted, that talents so pre-eminent should have been so often
misemployed; but, surely, the great apostle of infidelity is not a very
happy instance of a man of genius sinking under neglect or unmerited
reproach. Perhaps no literary character, except Pope, ever enjoyed
greater reputation during his life, or received more adulation from his
contemporaries, than Voltaire. The squibs of the minor wits and lite-
rary dunces, he himself delighted to provoke by his satire ; and his
misfortunes, such as they were, resulted, not from the world's injustice,
but from his own peculiar humour.—B. [The readings of the above
Letter which we supply from the Public Ledger, show the two years
later, or ' Citizen,' text to be a careful revision, wherein the eulogy of
III. M
<pb>
Let others, my friend, bestrew the hearses of the great
with panegyric; but such a loss as the world has now
suffered, affects me with stronger emotions. When a
philosopher dies, I consider myself as losing a patron, an
instructor, and a friend. I consider the world as losing
one who might serve to console her amidst the desolations
of war and ambition. Nature every day produces in
abundance men capable of filling all the requisite duties
of authority,1 but she is niggard in the birth of an
exalted mind, scarcely producing in a century a single
genius to bless and enlighten a degenerate age. Prodigal
in the production of kings, governors, mandarines, chams,
and courtiers, she seems to have forgotten, for more than
three thousand years, the manner in which she once
formed the brain of a Confucius; and well it is she has
forgotten, when a bad world gave him so very bad a
reception.
Whence, my friend, this malevolence, which has ever
pursued the great, even to the tomb ? whence this more
than fiend-like disposition of embittering the lives of
those who would make us more wise and more happy ?
When I cast my eye over the fates of several philoso-
phers, who "have, at different periods, enlightened man-
kind, I must confess it inspires me with the most
degrading reflections on humanity. When I read of the
stripes of Mencius, the tortures of Tchin, the bowl of
Socrates, and the bath of Seneca; when I hear of the
persecutions of Dante, the imprisonment of Galileo, the
indignities suffered by Montaigne, the banishment of
Cartesius, the infamy of Bacon, and that even Locke him-
self escaped not without reproach : when I think on such
subjects, I hesitate whether most to blame the ignorance
or the villainy of my fellow-creatures.
Should you look for the character of Voltaire among
the journalists and illiterate2 writers of the age, you will
there find him characterized as a monster, with a head
Voltaire is added to rather than not. See also Goldsmith's ' Memoirs
of Voltaire,' written in 1759, but, apparently, not published till 1761.
The ' Memoirs' are in vol. iv. of the present edition.—ED.]
1 The Public Ledger version has " grandeur."—ED.
2 The Public Ledger has " wretched, illiterate writers."—ED.
<pb>
turned to wisdom, and a heart inclining to vicel; 2 the
powers of his mind and the baseness of his principles
forming a detestable contrast.2 But seek for his character
among writers like himself, and you find him very
differently described. You perceive him, in their ac-
counts, possessed of good-nature, humanity, greatness of
soul, fortitude, and almost every virtue ; in this descrip-
tion, those who might be supposed best acquainted with
.his character are unanimous. The royal Prussian,3
D'Argens,4 Diderot,5 D'Alembert, and Fontenelle, con-
spire in drawing the picture, ° in describing the friend of
man, and the patron of every rising genius.6
An inflexible perseverance in what he thought was
right, and a generous detestation of flattery, formed the
groundwork of this great man's character. From these
principles many strong virtues and few faults arose : as
he was warm in his friendship, and severe in his resent-
ment, all that mention him seem possessed of the same
qualities, and speak of him with rapture or detestation. A
person of his eminence can have few indifferent as to his
character: every reader must be an enemy or an admirer.
This poet began the course of glory so early as the age
of eighteen, and even then was author of a tragedy which
deserves applause.7 Possessed of a small patrimony, he
preserved his independence in an age of venality,8 and sup-
ported the dignity of learning, by teaching his contem-
porary writers to live like him, above the favours of the
great. He was banished his native country for a satire
1 The Ledger has " baseness," instead of " vice."—ED.
2-2 This clause is not in the Public Ledger version.—ED.
3 PhilosopheSansSouci.—GOLDSMITH. [The King of Prussia's poetry,
which Gray thought " the crambe recoeta of our worst freethinkers"
{Mitford's ed. Gray, vol. iii., p. 241), and of which Horace Walpole,
writing to Mann, May 7, 1760, says: " Have you seen the works of the
philosopher of Sans Souci, or rather of the man who is no philosopher,
and who has more Souci than any man now in Europe ? How con-
temptible they are! Miserable poetry; not a new thought, nor an old
one newly expressed."—ED.]
* Let. Chin.—GOLDSMITH. 5 Encyclopedic.—GOLDSMITH.
6-6 This was not in the Ledger text.—ED. . .
7 Voltaire wrote ' CEdipe' when he was eighteen, and is said to have
written ' Amulius et Numitor,' now lost, at the age of thirteen.—ED.
8 The Ledger has " age of flattery."—ED.
<pb>
upon the royal concubine. He had accepted the place of
historian to the French king, but refused to keep it, when
he found it was presented only in order that he should be
the first flatterer of the state.
The great Prussian received him as an ornament to his
kingdom, and had sense enough to value his friendship,
and profit by his instructions. In this court he continued
till an intrigue, with which the world seems hitherto un-
acquainted, obliged him to quit that country. His own
happiness, the happiness of the monarch, of his sister,1 of
a part of the court, rendered his departure necessary.
Tired at length of courts, and all the follies of the great,
he retired to Switzerland, a country of liberty, where he
'enjoyed tranquillity and the muse. Here, though without
any taste for magnificence himself, he usually entertained
at his table the learned and polite of Europe, who were
attracted by a desire of seeing a person from whom they
had received so much satisfaction. The entertainment
was conducted with the utmost elegance, and the conver-
sation was that of philosophers. Every country that at
once united liberty and science, was his peculiar favourite.
The being an Englishman was to him a character that
claimed admiration and respect.2
Between Voltaire and the disciples of Confucius, there-
are many differences ; however, being of a different opinion
does not in the least diminish my esteem: I am not dis-
pleased with my brother, because he happens to ask our
father for favours in a different manner from me. Let his.
errors rest in peace, his excellencies deserve admiration:
let me with the wise admire his wisdom; let the envious
and the ignorant ridicule his foibles: the folly of others-
is ever most ridiculous to those who are themselves most
foolish. Adieu.
1 The early editions and Percy have " of his sister " in italic, but the
Public Ledger version is not so. The " sister " of course must be Frede-
rick's sister, Willhelmina, Margravine of Baireuth, who was a friend
and correspondent of Voltaire Doth before and after his retirement to
Switzerland. See the reference to her in the letter of Voltaire in our
edition of the 'Bee,' vol. ii., p. 317.—ED.
2 Perhaps here Goldsmith had in his mind his own interview with
Voltaire at Paris, or in Switzerland (if indeed it occurred at all), in,
1755. See ' Memoirs of Voltaire' in our vol. iv.—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE XLIV.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Hingpo, a Slave in Persia.
WISDOM AND PRECEPT MAY LESSEN OUR MISERIES ; BUT
CAN NEVER INCREASE OUR POSITIVE SATISFACTIONS.
IT is impossible to form a philosophic system of happi-
ness which is adapted to every condition in life, since every
person who travels in this great pursuit takes a separate
road.1 The differing colours which suit different com-
plexions, are not more various than the different pleasures
appropriated to different minds. The various sects who
have pretended to give lessons to instruct men in happi-
ness, have described their own particular sensations with-
out considering ours; have only loaded their disciples
with constraint, without adding to their real felicity.
If I find pleasure in dancing, how ridiculous would it be
in me to prescribe such an amusement for the entertain-
ment of a cripple: should he, on the other hand, place
his chief delight in painting, yet would he be absurd in
recommending the same relish to one who had lost the
power of distinguishing colours. General directions are,
therefore, commonly useless : and to be particular would
exhaust volumes, since each individual may require a par-
ticular system of precepts to direct his choice.
Every mind seems capable of entertaining a certain
quantity of happiness, which no institutions can increase,
no circumstances alter, and entirely independent of for-
tune. Let any man compare his present fortune with the
past, and he will probably find himself, upon the whole,
neither better nor worse than formerly.
Gratified ambition, or irreparable calamity, may produce
transient sensations of pleasure or distress. Those storms
may discompose in proportion as they are strong, or the
mind is pliant to their impression. But the soul, though
1 The Letter opens as follows in the Ptiblio Ledger:—"Happiness,
my son, which we all seek, and which we all may find, is impossible to
be attained by the observance of rules professing to point out the way,
since every person," &c.—ED.
<pb>
at first lifted up by the event, is every day operated upon
with diminished influence, and at length subsides into the
level of its usual tranquillity. Should some unexpected
turn of fortune take thee from fetters, and place thee on
a throne, exultation would be natural upon the change;
but the temper, like the face, would soon resume its native
serenity.
Every wish, therefore, which leads us to expect happi-
ness somewhere else but where we are, every institution
which teaches us that we should be better by being pos-
sessed of something new, which promises to lift us a step
higher than we are, only lays a foundation for uneasiness,
because it contracts debts which we cannot repay; it calls
that a good, which, when we have found it, will in fact,
add nothing to our happiness.
To enjoy the present, without regret for the past, or
solicitude for the future, has been the advice rather of
poets than philosophers. And yet the precept seems more
rational than is generally imagined. It is the only general
precept respecting the pursuit of happiness, that can be
applied with propriety to every condition of life. The
man of pleasure, the man of business, and the philosopher,
are equally interested in its disquisition. If we do not
find happiness in the present moment, in what shall we
find it ? Either in reflecting on the past, or prognosticating
the future. But let us see how these are capable of pro-
ducing satisfaction.
A remembrance of what is past, and an anticipation of
what is to come, seem to be the two faculties by which
man differs most from other animals. Though brutes
enjoy them in a limited degree, yet their whole life seems
taken up in the present, regardless of the past and the
future. Man, on the contrary, endeavours to derive his
happiness, and experiences most of his miseries, from
these two sources.
Is this superiority of reflection a prerogative of which
we should boast, and for which we should thank nature;
or is it a misfortune of which we should complain and be
humble ? Either from the abuse, or from the nature of
things, it certainly makes our condition more miserable.
Had we the privilege of calling up, by the power of
<pb>
memory, only such passages as were pleasing, unmixed
with such as were disagreeable, we might then excite, at
pleasure, an ideal happiness, perhaps more poignant than
actual sensation. But this is not the case: the past is
never represented without some disagreeable circumstance
which tarnishes all its beauty; the remembrance of an
evil carries in it nothing agreeable, and to remember a
good is always accompanied with regret. Thus we lose
more than we gain by the remembrance.
And we shall find our expectation of the future to be a
gift more distressful even than the former. To fear an
approaching evil, is certainly a most disagreeable sensa-
tion ; and in expecting an approaching good, we experience
the inquietude of wanting actual possession.
Thus, whichever way we look, the prospect is disagree-
able. Behind, we have left pleasures we shall never more
enjoy, and therefore regret; and before, we see pleasures
which we languish to possess, and are consequently uneasy
till we possess them. Was there any method of seizing
the present, unembittered by such reflections, then would
our state be tolerably easy.
This, indeed, is the endeavour of all mankind, who, un-
tutored by philosophy, pursue, as much as they can, a life
of amusement and dissipation. Every rank in life, and
every size of understanding, seems to follow this alone ;
or not pursuing it, deviates from happiness. The man of
pleasure pursues dissipation by profession; the man of
business pursues it not less, as every voluntary labour he
undergoes is only dissipation in disguise. The philosopher
himself, even while he reasons upon the subject, does it
unknowingly with a view of dissipating the thoughts of
what he was, or what he must be.
The subject, therefore, comes to this: Which is the
most perfect sort of dissipation,—-pleasure, business, or
philosophy ? Which best serves to exclude those uneasy
sensations which memory or anticipation produce ?
The enthusiasm of pleasure charms only by intervals.
The highest rapture lasts only for a moment: and all the
senses seem so combined, as to be soon tired into languor
by the gratification of any of them. It is only among the
poets we hear of men changing to one delight, when
<pb>
satiated with another. In nature it is very different: the
glutton, when sated with a full meal, is unqualified to feel
the real pleasure of drinking ; the drunkard, in turn, finds
few of those transports which lovers boast in enjoyment;
and the lover, when cloyed, finds a diminution of every
other appetite. Thus, after a full indulgence of any one
sense, the man of pleasure finds a languor in all, is placed
in a chasm between past and expected enjoyment, per-
ceives an interval which must be filled up. The present
can give no satisfaction, because he has already robbed it
of every charm : a mind thus left without immediate ' em-
ployment, naturally recurs to the past or the future : the
reflector finds that he was happy, and knows that he can-
not be so now; he sees that he may yet be happy, and
wishes the hour was come: thus every period of his con-
tinuance is miserable, except that very short one of im-
mediate gratification.' Instead of a life of dissipation,
none has more frequent conversations with disagreeable
self than he : his enthusiasms are but few and transient;
his appetites, like angry creditors, continually making
fruitless demands for what he is unable to pay ; and the
greater his former pleasure the more strong his regret, the
more impatient his expectations. A life of pleasure is
therefore the most unpleasing life in the world.2
Habit has rendered the man of business more cool in his
desires; he finds less regret for past pleasures, and less
solicitude for those to come. The life he now leads, though
tainted in some measure with hope, is yet not afflicted so
strongly with regret, and is less divided between short-
lived rapture and lasting anguish. The pleasures he has
enjoyed are not so vivid, and those he has to expect, can-
not consequently create so much anxiety.
The philosopher, who extends his regard to all mankind,
must have a still smaller concern for what has already
affected, or may hereafter affect, himself: the concerns of
'-1 The third edition (Author's, 1774, which we generally go by) omits
the fifty-three words between "immediate" and "immediate gratifi-
cation. Percy also omits them. But the first edition has them; and
Prior and later editors have restored them. They were evidently left
out by an easily understood printers' error.—ED.
2 In place of the last sentence the Public Ledger version has:—" Thus
the man of pleasure's is the most unpleasing life in the world."—ED.
<pb>
others make his whole study, and that study is his plea-
sure; and this pleasure is continuing in its nature, because
it can be changed at will, leaving but few of these anxious
intervals which are employed in remembrance or anticipa-
tion. The philosopher by this means leads a life of almost
continued dissipation; and reflection, which makes the
uneasiness and misery of others, serves as a companion
and instructor to him.
In a word, positive happiness is constitutional, and in-
capable of increase ; misery is artificial, and generally pro-
ceeds from our folly. Philosophy can add to our happi-
ness in no other manner but by diminishing our misery :
it should not pretend to increase our present stock, but
make us economists of what we are possessed of. The
great source of calamity lies in regret or anticipation : he,
therefore, is most wise, who thinks of the present alone,
regardless of the past or the future. This is impossible
to the man of pleasure; it is difficult to the man of busi-
ness ; and is in some measure attainable by the philo-
sopher. Happy were we all born philosophers; all born with
a talent of thus dissipating our own cares, by spreading
them upon all mankind !—Adieu.
LETTEE XLV.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President, &c.
THE ARDOUR OF THE PEOPLE OF LONDON IN RUNNING
THOUGH the frequent invitations I receive from men of
distinction here might excite the vanity of some, I am
quite mortified, however, when I consider the motives that
inspire their civility. I am sent for not to be treated as a
friend, but to satisfy curiosity; not to be entertained so
much as wondered at; the same earnestness which excites
them to see a Chinese, would have made them equally
proud of a visit from the rhinoceros.
1 Dated June 9 in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
From the highest to the lowest, this people seem fond
of sights and monsters. I am told of a person here who
gets a very comfortable livelihood by making wonders, and
then selling or showing them to the people for money: no
matter how insignificant they were in the beginning, by
locking them up close, and showing for money, they soon
become prodigies ! His first essay in this way was to ex-
hibit himself as a wax-work figure behind a glass door at
a puppet show. Thus, keeping the spectators at a proper
distance, and having his head adorned with a copper crown,
he looked " extremely natural, and very like the life itself."
He continued this exhibition with success, till an involun-
tary fit of sneezing brought him to life before all the spec-
tators, and consequently rendered him for that time as
entirely useless as the peaceable inhabitant of a catacomb.
Determined to act the statue no more, he next levied
contributions under the figure of an Indian king; and by
painting his face, and counterfeiting the savage howl, he
frighted several ladies and children with amazing success:
in this manner, therefore, he might have lived very com-
fortably, had he not been arrested for a debt that was con-
tracted when he was the figure in wax-work : thus his face
underwent an involuntary ablution, and he found himself
reduced to his primitive complexion and indigence.
After some time, being freed from jail, he was now
grown wiser, and instead of making himself a wonder, was
resolved only to make wonders. He learned the art of
pasting up mummies ; was never at a loss for an artificial
lusus naturae; nay, it has been reported, that he has sold
seven petrified lobsters of his own manufacture to a noted
collector of rarities; but this the learned Cracovius Put-
ridus has undertaken to refute in a very elaborate disser-
tation.
His last wonder was nothing more than a halter, yet by
this halter he gained more than by all his former exhibi-
tions. The people, it seems, had got it in their heads,
that a certain noble criminal was to be hanged with a
silken rope.1 Now, there was nothing they so much de-
1 It is said that Lord Ferrers, the criminal here meant, actually
petitioned that he might be hanged with a silken rope; but his request
was not complied with.—B. [The Public Ledger's own report of the
<pb>
sired to see as this very rope ; and he was resolved to
gratify their curiosity: he therefore got one made, not
only of silk, but, to render it more striking, several threads
of gold were intermixed. The people paid their money
only to see silk, but were highly satisfied when they found
it was mixed with gold into the bargain. It is scarcely
necessary to mention, that the projector sold his silken
rope for almost what it had cost him, as soon as the
criminal was known to be hanged in hempen materials.
By their fondness of sights, one would be apt to imagine
that instead of desiring to see things as they should be,
they are rather solicitous of seeing them as they ought
not to be. A cat with four legs is disregarded, though
never so useful; but if it has but two, and is consequently
incapable of catching mice, it is reckoned inestimable, and
every man of taste is ready to raise the auction. A man,
though in his person faultless as an aerial genius, might
starve; but if stuck over with hideous warts like a porcu-
pine, his fortune is made for ever, and he may propagate
the breed with impunity and applause.
A good woman in my neighbourhood, who was bred a
habit-maker, though she handled her needle tolerably well,
could scarcely get employment. But being obliged by an
accident to have both her hands cut off from the elbows,
what would in another country have been her ruin, made
her fortune here : she now was thought more fit for her
trade than before ; business flowed in apace, and all people
paid for seeing the mantua-maker who wrought without
hands.1
A gentleman, showing me his collection of pictures,
stopped at one with peculiar admiration : " There," cries
he, " is an inestimable piece." I gazed at the picture for
some time, but could see none of those graces with which
he seemed enraptured ; it appeared to me the most paltry
piece of the whole collection : I therefore demanded where
execution, May 6, the day after the event, expressly says that the halter
was " a common one." Walpole's account of the execution (quoted at
ante, p. 145) states that " the executioners fought for the rope, and
the one who lost it cried;" but the Ledger report does not mention this.
—Er.
1 The Ledger has " wrought with her stumps."—ED.
<pb>
those beauties lay, of which I was yet insensible. " Sir,"
cries he, " the merit does not consist in the piece, but in
the manner in which it was dtne. The painter drew the
whole with his foot, and held the pencil between his toes :
I bought it at a very great price; for peculiar merit
should ever be rewarded."
But these people are not more fond of wonders, than
liberal in rewarding those who show them. From the
wonderful dog of knowledge, at present under the patron-
age of the nobility, down to the man with the box, who
professes to show " the bestl imitation of Nature that was
ever seen," they all live in luxury. A singing woman shall
collect subscriptions in her own coach and six; a fellow
shall make a fortune by tossing a straw from his toe to
his nose ; one in particular has found that eating fire was
the most ready way to live; and another, who jingles
several bells fixed to his cap, is the only man that I know
of who has received emolument from the labours of his
head.
A young author, a man of good-nature and learning,
was complaining to me some nights ago of this misplaced
generosity of the times. " Here," says he, " have I spent
part of my youth in attempting to instruct and amuse my
fellow-creatures, and all my reward has been solitude,
and reproach; while a fellow, possessed of even poverty,
the smallest share of fiddling merit, or who has perhaps
learned to whistle double, is rewarded, applauded, and
caressed!"—" Prithee, young man," says I to him, " are
you ignorant, that in so large a city as this, it is better to
be an amusing than a useful member of society ? Can you
leap up, and touch your feet four times before you come
to the ground ? "—" No, sir."—" Can you pimp for a man
of quality ?"—" No, sir."—"Can you stand upon two
horses at full speed?"—" No, sir."—" Can you swallow a
penknife?"—"I can do none of these tricks."—"Why
then," cried I, " there is no other prudent means of sub-
sistence left, but to apprize the town that you speedily
intend to eat up your own nose, by subscription."
I have frequently regretted that none of our Eastern-
1 The early editions read " the most imitation." Percy introduced
" best."—ED.
<pb>
posture-masters, or showmen, have ever ventured to Eng-
land. I should be pleased to see that money circulate in
Asia, which is now sent to Italy and France, in order to
bring their vagabonds hither. Several of our tricks
would undoubtedly give the English high satisfaction.
Men of fashion would be greatly pleased with the postures
as well as the condescension of our dancing girls ; and the
ladies would equally admire the conductors of our fire-
works. What an agreeable surprise would it be to see a
huge fellow with whiskers flash a charged blunderbuss
full in a lady's face, without singeing her hair, or melting
her pomatum. Perhaps, when the first surprise was
over, she might then grow familiar with danger; and the
ladies might vie with each other in standing fire with in-
trepidity.
But of all the wonders of the East, the most useful, and
I should fancy the most pleasing, would be the looking-
glass of Lao, which reflects the mind as well as the body.
It is said, that the Emperor Chusi used to make his con-
cubines dress their heads and their hearts in one of these
glasses every morning: while the lady was at her toilet,
he would frequently look over her shoulder ; and it is
recorded, that among the three hundred which composed
his seraglio, not one was found whose mind was not even
more beautiful than her person.
I make no doubt but a glass in this country would have
the very same effect. The English ladies, concubines and
all, would undoubtedly cut very pretty figures in so faith-
ful a monitor. There, should we happen to peep over a
lady's shoulder while dressing, we might be able to see
neither gaming nor ill-nature ; neither pride, debauchery,
nor a love of gadding. We should find her, if any sensible
defect appeared in the mind, more careful in rectifying it,
than plastering up the irreparable decays of the person ;
nay, I am even apt to fancy, that ladies would find more
real pleasure in this utensil in private, than in any other
bauble imported from China, though never so expensive
or amusing.
r
<pb>
LETTEE XLVI.
To the Same.
[THE LOOKING-GLASS or LAO], A DREAM.
UPON finishing my last letter, I retired to rest, reflect-
ing upon the wouders of the glass of Lao, wishing to be
possessed of one here, and resolved, in such a case, to
oblige every lady with a sight of it for nothing. What
fortune denied me waking, fancy supplied in a dream:
the glass, I know not how, was put into my possession,
and I could perceive several ladies approaching, some
voluntarily, others driven forward against their wills, by a
set of discontented genii, whom, by intuition, I knew were
their husbands.
The apartment in which I was to show away, was filled
with several gaming-tables, as if just forsaken ; the can-
dles were burnt to the socket, and the hour was five o'clock
in the morning. Placed at one end of the room, which was
of prodigious length, I could more easily distinguish every
female figure as she marched up from the door; but, guess
my surprise, when I could scarce perceive one blooming
or agreeable face among the number.' This, however, I
attributed to the early hour, and kindly considered that
the face of a lady just risen from bed, ought always to find
a compassionate advocate.
The first person who came up in order to view her intel-
lectual face, was a commoner's wife, who, as I afterwards
found, being bred up during her virginity in a pawn-
broker's shop, now attempted to make up the defects of
breeding and sentiment by the magnificence of her dress,
and the expensiveness of her amusements. " Mr. Show-
man," cried she, approaching, " I am told you has some-
thing to show in that there sort of magic lantern, by which
folks can see themselves on the inside: I protest, as my
Lord Beetle says, I am sure it will be vastly pretty, for I
have never seen any thing like it before. But how,—Are
we to strip off our clothes, and be turned inside out ? if so,
as Lord Beetle says, I absolutely declare off; for I would
not strip for the world before a man's face, and so I tells
<pb>
his Lordship almost every night of my life." I informed
the lady that I would dispense with the ceremony of
stripping, and immediately presented my glass to her view.
As when a first-rate beauty, after having with difficulty
escaped the small-pox, revisits her favourite mirror—that
mirror which had repeated the flattery of every lover, and
even added force to the compliment—expecting to see what
had so often given her pleasure, she no longer beholds the
cherry lip, the polished forehead, and speaking blush, but
a hateful phiz, quilted into a thousand seams by the hand
of deformity; grief, resentment, and rage fill her bosom
by turns—she blames the fates and stars, but, most of all,
the unhappy glass feels her resentment: So it was with
the lady in question; she had never seen her own mind
before, and was now shocked at its deformity. One single
look was sufficient to satisfy her curiosity : I held up the
glass to her face, and and she shut her eyes ; no entreaties
could prevail upon her to gaze once more! She was even
going to snatch it from my hands, and break it in a thou-
sand pieces. I found it was time, therefore, to dismiss her
as incorrigible, and show away to the next that offered.
This was an unmarried lady, who continued in a state of
virginity till thirty-six, and then admitted a lover when
she despaired of a husband. No woman was louder at a
revel than she, perfectly free hearted, and almost, in every
respect a man; she understood ridicule to perfection, and
was once known even to sally out in order to beat the
watch. " Here, you, my dear, with the outlandish face,"
said she, addressing me, " let me take a single peep. Not
that I care three damns what figure I may cut in the glass
of such an old-fashioned creature: if I am allowed the
beauties of the face by people of fashion, I know the world
will be complaisant enough to toss me the beauties of the
mind into the bargain." I held my glass before her as she
desired, and, must confess, was shocked with the reflec-
tion. The lady, however, gazed for some time with the
utmost complacency ; and, at last, turning to me with the
most satisfied smile, said, she never could think she had
been half so handsome.
Upon her dismission, a lady of distinction was reluc-
tantly hauled along to the glass by her husband. In
<pb>
bringing her forward, as he came first to the glass himself,
his mind appeared tinctured with immoderate jealousy, and
I was going to reproach him for using her with such
severity ; but when the lady came to present herself, I
immediately retracted: for, alas ! it was seen that he had
but too much reason for his suspicions.
The next was a lady who usually teased all her acquain-
tance in desiring to be told of her faults, and then never
mended any. Upon approaching the glass, I could readily
perceive vanity, affectation, and some other ill-looking
blots on her mind; wherefore, by my advice, she imme-
diately set about mending. But I could easily find she
was not earnest in the work ; for as she repaired them on
one side, they generally broke out on another. Thus, after
three or four attempts, she began to make the ordinary
use of the glass in settling her hair.
The company now made room for a woman of learning,
who approached with a slow pace and a solemn coun-
tenance, which, for her own sake, I could wish had been
cleaner. " Sir," cried the lady, flourishing her hand, which
held a pinch of snuff, " I shall be enraptured by having
presented to my view a mind, with which I have so long
studied to be acquainted ; but, in order to give the sex a
proper example, I must insist, that all the company may
be permitted to look over my shoulder." I bowed assent,
and, presenting the glass, showed the lady a mind by no
means so fair as she had expected to see. Ill-nature, ill-
placed pride, and spleen, were too legible to be mistaken.
Nothing could be more amusing than the mirth of her
female companions who had looked over. They had hated
her from the beginning, and now the apartment echoed
with a universal laugh. Nothing but a fortitude like hers
could have withstood their raillery: she stood it, how-
ever; and, when the burst was exhausted, with great tran-
quillity she assured the company, that the whole was a
deceptio visus, and that she was too well acquainted with
her own mind to believe any false representations from
another. Thus saying, she retired with a sullen satisfac-
tion, resolved not to mend her faults, but to write a
criticism on the mental reflector.
I must own, by this time, I began myself to suspect the
<pb>
fidelity of my mirror; for, as the ladies appeared at least
to have the merit of rising early, since they were up at five,
I was amazed to find nothing of this good quality pictured
upon their minds in the reflection: I was resolved, there-
fore, to communicate my suspicions to a lady whose in-
tellectual countenance appeared more fair than any of the
rest, not having above seventy-nine spots in all, besides
slips and foibles. " I own, young woman," said I, " that
there are some virtues upon that mind of yours ; but there
is still one which I do not see represented, I mean that of
rising betimes in the morning—I fancy the glass false in
that particular." The young lady smiled at my simplicity;
and, with a blush, confessed, that she and the whole com-
pany had been up all night gaming.
By this time all the ladies, except one, had seen them-
selves successively, and disliked the show, or scolded the
showman: I was resolved, however, that she who seemed
to neglect herself, and was neglected by the rest, should
take a view; and, going up to a corner of the room where
she still continued sitting, I presented my glass full in her
face. Here it was that I exulted in my success; no blot,
no stain appeared on any part of the faithful mirror. As
when the large unwritten page presents its snowy spotless
bosom to the writer's hand, so appeared the glass to my
view. "Here, O ye daughters of English ancestors!"
cried I, " turn hither, and behold an object worthy imita-
tion ! Look upon the mirror now, and acknowledge its
justice, and this woman's pre-eminence! " The ladies,
obeying the summons, came up in a group, and looking on,
acknowledged there was some truth in the picture, as the
person now represented had been deaf, dumb, and a fool
from her cradle !
Thus much of my dream I distinctly remember; the
rest was filled with chimeras, enchanted castles, and flying
dragons as usual. As you, my dear Fum Hoam, are
particularly versed in the interpretation of those midnight
warnings, what pleasure should I find in your explanation!
But that our distance prevents: I make no doubt, how-
ever, but that, from my description, you will very much
venerate the good qualities of the English ladies in general,
since dreams, you know, go always by contraries. Adieu.
III. N
<pb>
LETTER XLVII.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Hingpo, a slave, in Persia.1
MISERY BEST BELIEVED BY DISSIPATION.2
YOUR last letters betray a mind seemingly fond of
wisdom, yet tempested up by a thousand Tarious passions.
You would fondly persuade me that my former lessons
still influence your conduct, and yet your mind seems not
less enslaved than your body. Knowledge, wisdom, erudi-
tion, arts, and elegance, what are they but the mere trap-
pings of the mind, if they do not serve to increase the
happiness of the possessor ? A mind rightly instituted in
the school of philosophy, acquires at once the stability of
the oak, and the flexibility of the osier. The truest
manner of lessening our agonies, is to shrink from their
pressure—is to confess that we feel them.
The fortitude of European sages is but a dream; for
where lies the merit in being insensible to the strokes of
fortune, or in dissembling our sensibility ? If we are in-
sensible, that arises only from a happy constitution ; that
is a blessing previously granted by Heaven, and which no
art can procure, no institutions improve.
If we dissemble our feelings, we only artificially endea-
vour to persuade others that we enjoy privileges which we
actually do not possess. Thus, while we endeavour to appear
happy, we feel at once all the pangs of internal misery,
and all the self-reproaching consciousness of endeavouring
to deceive.
I know but of two sects of philosophers in the world
that have endeavoured to inculcate that fortitude is but
an imaginary virtile,—I mean the followers of Confucius,
and those who profess the doctrines of Christ. All other
sects teach pride under misfortunes; they alone teach
humility. Night, says our Chinese philosopher, not more
1 This letter appears to be little more than a rhapsody of sentiments
from Confncius. Vide the Latin translation.—GOLDSMITH.
* See also Letter XLIV., and the ' Bee' essay, ' Happiness in a
great measure Dependent on Constitution,' vol. ii., p. .'J34.—ED.
<pb>
surely follows day, than groans and tears grow out of
pain; when misfortunes therefore oppress, when tyrants
threaten, it is our interest, it is our duty to fly even to
dissipation for support, to seek redress from friendship,
or seek redress from that best of friends who loved us
into being.
Philosophers, my son, have long declaimed against the
passions, as being the source of all our miseries : they are
the source of all our misfortunes, I own; but they are
the source of our pleasures too: and every endeavour of
our lives, and all the institutions of philosophy, should
tend to this, not to dissemble an absence of passion, but
to repel those which lead to vice, by those which direct to
virtue.
The soul may be compared to a field of battle, where
two armies are ready every moment to encounter: not a
single vice but has a more powerful opponent, and not
one virtue but may be overborne by a combination of
vices. Reason guides the bands of either host; nor can
it subdue one passion but by the assistance of another.
Thus, as a bark on every side beset with storms, enjoys a
state of rest, so does the mind, when influenced by a just
equipoise of the passions, enjoy tranquillity.
I have used such means as my little fortune would
admit to procure your freedom. I have lately written to
the governor of Argun to pay your ransom, though at the
expense of all the wealth I brought with me from China.
If we become poor, we shall at least have the pleasure of
bearing poverty together ; for what is fatigue or famine,
when weighed against friendship and freedom ! Adieu.
<pb>
LETTEE XLVIII.
From Lien Ch i Altangi, to , Merchant in Amsterdam.
THE ABSURDITY OF PERSONS IN HIGH STATION PURSUING
EMPLOYMENTS BENEATH THEM, EXEMPLIFIED IN A
FAIRY TALE.1 [PRINCE BONBENNIN.]
HAPPENING some days ago to call at a painters, to
amuse myself in examining some pictures (I had no
design to buy), it surprised me to see a young prince
in the working room, dressed ill a painters apron, and
assiduously learning the trade. We instantly remembered
to have seen each other; and, after the usual compli-
ments, I stood by while he continued to paint on. As
every thing done by the rich is praised—as princes here,
as well as in China, are never without followers—three or
four persons, who had the appearance of gentlemen, were
placed behind to comfort and applaud him at every
stroke.
Need I tell, that it struck me with very disagreeable
sensations, to see a youth, who, by his station in life, had
it in his power to be useful to thousands, thus letting his
mind run to waste upon canvass, and at the same time
fancying himself improving in taste, and filling his rank
with proper decorum ?
As seeing an error, and attempting to redress it, are
only one and the same with me, I took occasion, upon his
Lordship desiring my opinion of a Chinese scroll, intended
for the frame of a picture, to assure him, that a man-
darine of China thought a minute acquaintance with such
mechanical trifles below his dignity.
This reply raised the indignation of some, and the con-
tempt of others : I could hear the names of Vandal, Goth,
taste, polite arts, delicacy, and fire, repeated in tones of
ridicule or resentment. But considering that it was in
vain to argue against people who had so much to say,
without contradicting them, I begged leave to repeat a
fairy tale. This request redoubled their laughter; but,
1 Dated June 17, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
not easily abashed at the raillery of boys, I persisted,
observing, that it would set the absurdity of placing our
affections upon trifles in the strongest point of view; and
adding, that it was hoped the moral would compensate
for its stupidity. " For Heaven's sake," cried the great
man, washing his brush in water, " let us have no morality
at present; if we must have a story, let it be without any
moral." I pretended not to hear; and, while he handled
the brush, proceeded as follows :—
" In the kingdom of Bonbobbin, which, by the Chinese
annal, appears to have flourished twenty thousand years
ago, there reigned a Prince endowed with every accom-
plishment which generally distinguishes the sons of kings.
His be'auty was brighter than the sun. The sun, to which
he was nearly related, would sometimes stop his course,
in order to look down and admire him.
" His mind was not less perfect than his body : he knew
all things, without having ever read : philosophers, poets,
and historians, submitted their works to his decision ; and
so penetrating was he, that he could tell you the merit of
a book by looking on the cover. He made epic poems,
tragedies, and pastorals, with surprising facility; song,
epigram, or rebus, was all one to him, though it was
observed he could never finish an acrostic. In short, the
fairy who presided at his birth had endowed him with
almost every perfection, or, what was just the same, his
subjects were ready to acknowledge he possessed them
all; and, for his own part, he knew nothing to the con-
trary. A prince so accomplished, received a name suitable
to his merit; and he was called Bonbennin-bonbobbin-
bon bobbinet, which signifies, Enlightener of the Sun.
" As he was very powerful, and yet unmarried, all the
neighbouring kings earnestly sought his alliance. Each
sent his daughter, dressed out in the most magnificent
manner, and with the most sumptuous retinue imaginable,
in order to allure the prince; so that at one time there
were seen at his court not less than seven hundred foreign
princesses, of exquisite sentiment and beauty, each alone
sufficient to make seven hundred ordinary men happy.
" Distracted in such a variety, the generous Bonbennin,
had he not been obliged by the laws of the empire to make
<pb>
choice of one, would very willingly have married them all,
for none understood gallantry better. He spent number-
less hours of solicitude in endeavouring to determine
whom he should choose: one lady was possessed of every
perfection, but he disliked her eyebrows; another was
brighter than the morning star, but he disapproved her
foong-hodny;' a third did not lay white enough on her
cheek; and a fourth did not sufficiently blacken her nails.
At hist, after numberless disappointments on the one side
and the other, he made choice of the incomparable Nanhoa,
Queen of the Scarlet Dragons.
" The preparations for the royal nuptials, or the envy
of the disappointed ladies, need no description ; both the
one and the other were as great as they could be: the
beautiful princess was conducted amidst admiring multi-
tudes to the royal couch, where, after being divested of
every encumbering ornament, she was placed, in expectance
of the youthful bridegroom, who did not keep her long in
expectation. He came more cheerful than the morning,
and printing on her lips a burning kiss, the attendants
took this as a proper signal to withdraw.
" Perhaps I ought to have mentioned in the beginning,
that among several other qualifications, the Prince was
fond of collecting and breeding mice, which being a harm-
less pastime, none of his counsellors thought proper to
dissuade him from: he therefore kept a great variety of
these pretty little animals, in the most beautiful cages,
enriched with diamonds, rubies, emeralds, pearls, and
other precious stones : thus he innocently spent four hours
each day, in contemplating their innocent little pastimes.
" But to proceed: The Prince and Princess were now in
bed; one with all the love and expectation, the other with
all the modesty and fear, which is natural to suppose;
both willing, yet afraid to begin; when the prince, hap-
pening to look towards the outside of the bed, perceived
one of the most beautiful animals in the world, a white
mouse with green eyes, playing about the floor, and per-
forming a hundred pretty tricks. He was already master
of blue mice, red mice, and even white mice, with yellow
eyes, but a white mouse with green eyes, was what he
1 See Letter XXXIX. (Yaoua to Yaya).—ED.
<pb>
[had] long endeavoured to possess; wherefore, leaping
from bed with the utmost impatience and agility, the
youthful prince attempted to seize the little charmer,
but it was fled in a moment; for alas ! the mouse was
sent by a discontented princess, and was itself a fairy.
" It is impossible to describe the agony of the Prince
upon this occasion; he sought round and round every
part of the room; even the bed where the Princess lay
was not exempt from the enquiry: he turned the Princess
on one side and the other, stripped her quite naked, but
no mouse was to be found ; the Princess herself was kind
enough to assist, but still to no purpose.
"' Alas! ' cried the young Prince in an agony, ' how
unhappy am I to be thus disappointed! never, sure, was
so beautiful an animal seen : I would give half my king-
dom, and my princess, to him that would find it.' The
Princess, though not much pleased with the latter part of
his offer, endeavoured to comfort him as well as she could :
she let him know that he had a hundred mice already,
which ought to be at least sufficient to satisfy any philo-
sopher like him. Though none of them had green eyes,
yet he should learn to thank Heaven that they had eyes.
She told him (for she was a profound moralist) that in-
curable evils must be borne, and that useless lamentations
were vain, and that man was born to misfortunes ; she
even entreated him to return to bed, and she would endea-
vour to lull him on her bosom to repose: but still the
Prince continued inconsolable; and regarding her with a
stern air, for which his family was remarkable, he vowed
never to sleep in the royal palace, or indulge himself in
the innocent pleasures of matrimony, till he had found the
white mouse with the green eyes."
" Prithee, Colonel Leech," cried his Lordship, inter-
rupting me, " how do you like that nose ? don't you think
there is something of the manner of Rembrandt in it ?—
A prince in all this agony for a white mouse, oh, ridicu-
lous !—Don't you think, Major Vampyre, that eyebrow
stippled very prettily ?—But pray, what are the green eyes
to the purpose, except to amuse children ?—I would give
a thousand guineas to lay on the colouring of this cheek
more smoothly.—But I ask pardon; pray, Sir, proceed."
<pb>
LETTEE XLIX.
To the Same.
" KINGS," continued I, " at that time were different from
what they are now ; they then never engaged their word
for any thing which th'ey did not rigorously intend to
perform. This was the case of Bonbennin, who continued
all night to lament his misfortunes to the Princess, who
echoed groan for groan. When morning came, he pub-
lished an edict, offering half his kingdom, and his
princess, to the person who should catch and bring him
the white mouse with the green eyes.
" The edict was scarce published, when all the traps
in the kingdom were baited with cheese; numberless mice
were taken and destroyed ; but still the much-wished-for
mouse was not among the number. The privy-council was
assembled more than once to give their advice; but all
their deliberations came to nothing, even though there
were two complete vermin-killers, and three professed
rat-catchers of the number. Frequent addresses, as is
usual on extraordinary occasions, were sent from all parts
of the empire; but though these promised well, though
in them he received an assurance that his faithful subjects
would assist in his search with their lives and fortunes,
yet, with all their loyalty, they failed when the time came
that the mouse was to be caught.
" The Prince, therefore, was resolved to go himself in
search, determined never to lie two nights in one place,
till he had found what he sought for. Thus, quitting his
palace, without attendants, he set out upon his journey,
and travelled through many a desert, and crossed many a
river, over high hills, and down along vales, still restless,
still enquiring wherever he came; but no white mouse
was to be found.
" As, one day, fatigued with his journey, he was shading
' Dated June 18, 1760, in the Public Ledger. See the note at the
end of the Letter.—ED.
<pb>
himself from the heat of the midday sun, under the arch-
ing branches of a banana tree, meditating on the object
of his pursuit, he perceived an old woman, hideously de-
formed, approaching him ; by her stoop, and the wrinkles of
her visage, she seemed at least five hundred years old; and
the spotted toad was not more freckled than was her skin.
' Ah ! Prince Bonbennin-bonbobbin-bonbobbinet,' cried
the creature, ' what has led you so many thousand miles
from your own kingdom ? what is it you look for, and
what induces you to travel into the kingdom of Emmets ? '
The Prince, who was excessively complaisant, told her the
whole story three times over; for she was hard of hearing.
' Well,' says the old fairy, for such she was, ' I promise to
put you in possession of the white mouse with green eyes,
and that immediately too, upon one condition.'—' One
condition! ' cried the Prince in a rapture, ' name a
thousand; I shall undergo them all with pleasure.'—
' Nay,' interrupted the old fairy, ' I ask but one, and that
not very mortifying neither,—it is only that you instantly
consent to marry me.'
" It is impossible to express the Prince's confusion at
this demand; he loved the mouse, but he detested the bride :
he hesitated; he desired time to think upon the proposal;
he would have been glad to consult his friends on such an
occasion. ' Nay, nay,' cried the odious fairy, ' if you de-
mur, I retract my promise; I do not desire to force my
favours on any man. Here, you my attendants,' cried she,
stamping with her foot, ' let my machine be driven up;
Barbacela, Queen of Emmets, is not used to contemptuous
treatment.' She had no sooner spoken than her fiery
chariot appeared in the air, drawn by two snails ; and she
was just going to step in, when the Prince reflected, that now
or never was the time to be possessed of the white mouse;
and quite forgetting his lawful Princess Nanhoa, falling
on his knees, he implored forgiveness for having rashly
rejected so much beauty. This well-timed compliment
instantly appeased the angry fairy. She affected a hideous
leer of approbation, and taking the young Prince by the
hand, conducted him to a neighbouring church, where they
were married together in a moment. As soon as the cere-
mony was performed, the Prince, who was to the last
<pb>
degree desirous of seeing his favourite mouse, reminded
the bride of her promise. ' To confess a truth, my Prince,'
cried she, ' I myself am that very white mouse you saw on
your wedding-night in the royal apartment. I now, there-
fore, give you the choice, whether you would have me a
mouse by day, and a woman by night, or a mouse by night,
and a woman by day.' Though the Prince was an excel-
lent casuist, he was quite at a loss how to determine; but
at last thought it most prudent to have recourse to a blue
cat that had followed him from his own dominions, and
frequently amused him with its conversation, and assisted
him with its advice; in fact, this cat was no other than
the faithful Princess Nanhoa herself, who had shared with
him all his hardships in this disguise.
" By her instructions he was determined in his choice,
and returning to the old fairy, prudently observed, that
as she must have been sensible he had married her ' only
for the sake of what she had,' and not for her personal
qualifications, he thought it would, for several reasons, be
most convenient if she continued a woman by day, and
appeared a mouse by night.
" The old fairy was a good deal mortified at her hus-
band's want of gallantry, though she was reluctantly ob-
liged to comply : the day was therefore spent in the most
polite amusements ; the gentlemen talked smut, the ladies
laughed, and were angry. At last the happy night drew
near, the blue cat still stuck by the side of its master, and
even followed him to the bridal apartment. Barbacela
entered the chamber wearing a train fifteen yards long,
supported by porcupines, and all over beset with jewels,
which served to render her more detestable. She was just
stepping into bed to the Prince, forgetting her promise,
when he insisted upon seeing her in the shape of a mouse.
She had promised, and no fairy can break her word;
wherefore, assuming the figure of the most beautiful
mouse in the world, she skipped and played about with
an infinity of amusement. The Prince, in an agony of
rapture, was desirous of seeing his pretty play-fellow move
a slow dance about the floor to his own singing ; he began
to sing, and the mouse immediately to perform with the
most perfect knowledge of time, and the finest grace and
<pb>
187
greatest gravity imaginable. It only began, for Nanhoa
(who had long waited for the opportunity in the shape of
a cat) flew upon it instantly without remorse, and eating
it up in the hundredth part of a moment, broke the charm,
and then resumed her natural figure.
" The Prince now found that he had all along been under
the power of enchantment, that his passion for the white
mouse was entirely fictitious, and not the genuine com-
plexion of his soul; he now saw that his earnestness after
mice was an illiberal amusement, and much more becom-
ing a rat-catcher than a Prince. All his meannesses now
stared him in the face; he begged the discreet Princess's
pardon a hundred times. The Princess very readily for-
gave him; and both returning to their palace in Bon-
bobbin, lived very happily together, and reigned many
years, with all that wisdom, which, by the story, they
appear to have been possessed of; perfectly convinced by
their former adventures, that they who place their affections
on trifles at first for amusement, ivill find those trifles at last
become their most serious concern." ' Adieu.
LETTER L.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President of
the Ceremonial Academy at Pekin, in China.
AN ATTEMPT TO DEFINE WHAT IS MEANT BY ENGLISH
LIBERTY.2
ASK an Englishman what nation in the world enjoys
most freedom, and he immediately answers, his own. Ask
1 Some editors connect this fairy tale with the story of Pilkington
and the white mice—an episode ia Goldsmith's own life. See our
' Life,' p. 38, and the European Magazine, vol. xxiv., p. 259. It is possible
that the imposition said to have been practised npon our author by " the
ingenious Mr. Pilkington" occurred immediately before the above tale
was written, and that it, in fact, suggested the writing of the tale.—ED.
2 Dated June 19, 1760, in the Public Ledger. The variations show
that Goldsmith took more than usual pains'in revising this Letter for
the ' Citizen' issue.—ED.
<pb>
him in what that freedom principally consists, and he is
instantly silent. This happy pre-eminence does not arise
from the people enjoying a larger share in legislation than
elsewhere: for in this particular, several states in Europe
excel them; nor does it arise from a greater exemption
from taxes, for few countries pay more. It does not pro
ceed from their being restrained by fewer laws, for no
people are burthened with so many; nor does it particu-
larly consist in the security of their property, for property
is pretty well secured in every polite state in Europe.
How, then, are the English more free (for more free
they certainly are) than the people of any other country,
or under any other form of government whatever ? Their
freedom consists in their enjoying all the advantages of
democracy, with this superior prerogative borrowed from
monarchy, that the severity of their laws may be relaxed
without endangering the constitution.
In a monarchical state in which the constitution is
strongest, the laws may be relaxed without danger ; for
though the people should be unanimous in the breach of
any one in particular, yet still there is an effective power
superior to the people, capable of enforcing obedience,
whenever it may be proper to inculcate the law either
towards the support or welfare of the community.
But in all those governments where laws derive their
sanction from the people alone, transgressions cannot be
overlooked without bringing the constitution into danger.
1 They who transgress the law in such a case, are those who
prescribe it, by which means it loses not only its influence
but its sanction.1 In every republic the laws must be
strong, because the constitution is feeble ; they must re-
semble an Asiatic husband, who is justly jealous, because
he knows himself impotent. Thus, in Holland, Switzer-
land, and Genoa, new laws are not frequently enacted, but
the old ones are observed with unremitting severity. In
such republics, therefore, the people are slaves to laws of
their own making, little less than in unmixed monarchies,
where they are slaves to the will of one subject to frail-
ties like themselves.
'-1 Not in the Ledger version.—ED.
<pb>
189
In England, from a variety of happy accidents, their
constitution is just strong enough, ' or, if you will,
monarchical enough,1 to permit a relaxation of the severity
of laws, and yet those laws still to" remain sufficiently
strong to govern the people. This is the most perfect
state of civil liberty, of which we can form any idea:
Here we see a greater number of laws than in any other
country, while the people at the same time obey only such
as are immediately conducive to the interests of society;
several are unnoticed, many unknown; some kept to be
revived and enforced upon proper occasions; others left
to grow obsolete, even without the necessity of abro-
gation.
There is scarce an Englishman who does not almost
every day of his life offend with impunity against some
express law, and for which, in a certain conjuncture of
circumstances, he would not receive punishment. Gaming-
houses, preaching at prohibited places, assembled crowds,
nocturnal amusements, public shows, and a hundred other
instances, are forbid and frequented. These prohibitions
are useful; though it be prudent in their magistrates,
and happy for the people, that they are not enforced,3 and
none but the venal or mercenary attempt to enforce them.3
The law, in this case, like an indulgent parent, still
keeps the rod, though the child is seldom corrected.
Were those pardoned offences to rise into enormity, were
they likely to obstruct the happiness of society, or en-
danger the state, it is then that Justice would resume her
terrors, and punish those faults she had so often over-
looked with indulgence. It is to this ductility of the laws
that an Englishman owes the freedom he enjoys superior
to others in a more popular government: every step,
therefore, the constitution takes towards a democratic
form, every diminution of the regal authority, is, in fact,
a diminution of the subject's freedom; but every attempt
to render the government more popular, not only impairs
natural liberty, but even will, at last, dissolve the political
constitution.
'-1 Not in the Ledger.—ED.
2 The Ledger text reads " still remain."—ED.
3-3 Another addition to the original text.—ED.
<pb>
Every popular government seems calculated to last only
for a time; it grows rigid with age, new laws are mul-
tiplying, and the old continue in force ; the subjects are
oppressed, burthened with a multiplicity of legal injunc-
tions ; there are none from whom to expect redress, and
nothing but a strong convulsion in the state can vindicate
them into former liberty: thus the people of Rome, a few
great ones excepted, found more real freedom under their
emperors, though tyrants, than they had experienced in
the old age of the commonwealth, in which their laws
were become numerous and painful, in which new laws
were every day enacting, and the old ones executed with
rigour. They even refused to be reinstated in their former
prerogatives, upon an offer made them to this purpose;
for they actually found emperors the only means of soften-
ing the rigours of their constitution.
The constitution of England is at present possessed of
the strength of its native oak, and the flexibility of the
bending tamarisk; but should the people at any time,
with a mistaken zeal, pant after an imaginary freedom,
and fancy that abridging monarchy was increasing their
privileges, they would be very much mistaken, since every
jewel plucked from the crown of majesty, would only be
made use of as a bribe to corruption : it might enrich the
few who shared it among them, but would in fact im-
poverish the public.
As the Roman senators, by slow and imperceptible de-
grees, became masters of the people, yet still flattered
them with a show of freedom, while themselves only were
free; so it is possible for a body of men, while they stand
up for privileges, to grow into an exuberance of power
.themselves, and the public become actually dependent,
while some of its individuals only govern.1
If, then, my friend, there should in this country ever be
on the throne a king, who, through good nature or age,
should give up the smallest part of his prerogative to the
people; if there should come a minister of merit and
popularity—But I have room for no more. Adieu.
1 Compare ' The Traveller,' 11. 381, &c. :—
" But when contending chiefs blockade the throne," &c.—ED.
<pb>
191
LETTEE LI.
To the Same.
A BOOKSELLER'S VISIT TO THE CHINESE.'
As I was yesterday seated at breakfast over a pensive
dish of tea, my meditations were interrupted by my old
friend and companion, who introduced a stranger, dressed
pretty much like himself. The gentleman made several
apologies for his visit, begged of me to impute his intru-
sion to the sincerity of his respect, and the warmth of his
curiosity.
As I am very suspicious of my company when I find
them very civil without any apparent reason, I answered
the stranger's caresses at first with reserve; which my
friend perceiving, instantly let me into my visitant's trade
and character, asking Mr. Fudge,2 whether he had lately
published any thing new ? I now conjectured that my
guest was no other than a bookseller, and his answer con-
firmed my suspicions.
" Excuse me, Sir," says he, " it is not the season; books
have their time as well as cucumbers. I would no more
bring out a new work in summer, than I would sell pork
in the dog days. Nothing in my way goes off in summer,
except very light goods indeed. A review, a magazine, or
a Sessions paper, may amuse a summer reader; but all
our stock of value we reserve for a spring and winter
trade." " I must confess, Sir," says I, " a curiosity to know
what you call a valuable stock, which can only bear a
winter perusal." " Sir," replied the bookseller, " it is not
my way to cry up my own goods ; but, without exaggera-
tion, I will venture to show with any of the trade : my
books at least have the peculiar advantage of being always
new; and it is my way to clear off my old to the trunk -
1 Dated June 23 in the Public Ledger.—ED.
2 A second use of " Fudge " by the author prior to his famous use of
the word in the ' Vicar of Wakefield.' See Appendix note to the latter
in our vol. i.—ED.
<pb>
makers every season. I have ten new title-pages now
about me, which only want books to be added to make
them the finest things in nature. Others may pretend to
direct the vulgar ; but that is not my way ; I always let
the vulgar direct me; wherever popular clamour arises, I
always echo the million. For instance, should the people
in general say, that such a man is a rogue, I instantly
give orders to set him down in print a villain ; thus every
man buys the book, not to learn new sentiments, but to
have the pleasure of seeing his own reflected."—" But,
Sir," interrupted I, " you speak as if you yourself wrote
the books you publish ; may I be so bold as to ask a sight
of some of those intended publications which are shortly
to surprise the world?"—"As to that, Sir," replied the
talkative bookseller, " I only draw out the plans myself;
and though I am very cautious of communicating them to
any, yet, as in the end I have a favour to ask, you shall
see a few of them. Here, Sir, here they are; diamonds
of the first water, I assure you. Imprimis, a Translation
of several Medical precepts for the use of such physicians
as do not understand Latin. Item, the Young Clergy-
man's art of placing patches regularly, with a Disserta-
tion on the different manners of smiling without distort-
ing the face. Item, the whole Art of Love made perfectly
easy, by a broker of 'Change Alley. Item, the proper
manner of Cutting blacklead pencils, and making crayons,
by the Right Hon. the Earl of * * *. Item, the Muster-
master-general, or the review of reviews."—" Sir," cried
I, interrupting him, " my curiosity, with regard to title-
pages, is satisfied; I should be glad to see some longer
manuscript, a history, or an epic poem."—" Bless me ! "
cries the man of industry, " now you speak of an epic
poem, you shall see an excellent farce. Here it is ; dip
into it where you will, it will be found replete with true
modern humour. Strokes, Sir; it is filled with strokes of'
wit and satire in every line."—" Do you call these dashes
of the pen strokes," replied I, " for I must confess I can
see no other ? "—" And pray, Sir," returned he, " what do
you call them ? Do you see any thing good now-a-days,
that is not filled with strokes—and dashes ?—Sir, a well
placed dash makes half the wit of our writers of modern
<pb>
humour.1 I bought a piece last season that had no other
merit upon earth than nine hundred and ninety-five
breaks, seventy-two ha-ha's, three good things, and a
garter.2 And yet it played off, and bounced, and cracked,
and made more sport than a firework."—" I fancy, then,
Sir, you were a considerable gainer?"—"It must be
owned the piece did pay; but, upon the whole, I cannot
much boast of last winter's success; I gained by two
murders; but then I lost by an ill-timed charity sermon.
I was a considerable sufferer by my Direct Road to an
Estate, but the Infernal Guide brought me up again.
Ah, Sir, that was a piece touched off by the hand of a
master ; filled with good things from one end to the other.
The author had nothing but the jest in view; no dull
moral lurking beneath, nor ill-natured satire to sour the
reader's good-humour ; he wisely considered, that moral
and humour at the same time were quite overdoing the
business."—" To what purpose was the book then pub-
lished ? " cried I.—" Sir, the book was published in order
to be sold; and no book sold better, except the criticisms
upon it, which came out soon after: of all kinds of
writing, that goes off best at present; and I generally
fasten a criticism upon every selling book that is pub-
lished.
" I once had an author who never left the least opening
for the critics : close was the word ; always very right and
very dull; ever on the safe side of an argument; yet,
with all his qualifications, incapable of coming into favour.
I soon perceived that his bent was for criticism; and, as
he was good for nothing else, supplied him with pens and
paper, and planted him, at the beginning of every month,
1 This idea is well ridiculed by our late excellent poet Cowper in his
'Table Talk':—
" A Prologue, interdash'd with many a stroke,
An art contriv'd to advertise a joke,
So that the jest is clearly to be seen,
Not in the words—but in the gap between."
PEROT'S edition of Goldsmith, 1801.
2 Mr. Cunningham thought this was a hit at 'High Life Below
Stairs,' which Goldsmith is severe upon in No. V. of the ' Bee.' At this
time, and later, the world generally, and perhaps Goldsmith with it,
attributed Townley's farce to Garrick.—ED.
III. O
r
<pb>
as a censor on the works of others. In short, I found him
a treasure ; no merit could escape him ; but what is most
remarkable of all, he ever wrote best and bitterest when
drunk." " But are there not some works," interrupted I,
" that, from the very manner of their composition, must
be exempt from criticism ; particularly such as profess to
disregard its laws?"—" There is no work whatsoever but
he can criticise," replied the bookseller; " even though
you wrote in Chinese, he would have a pluck at you. Sup-
pose you should take it into your head to publish a book,
let it be a volume of Chinese letters, for instance; write
how you will, he shall show the world you could have
written better. Should you, with the most local exact-
ness, stick to the manners and customs of the country
from whence you come; should you confine yourself to
the narrow limits of Eastern knowledge, and be perfectly
simple, and perfectly natural, he has then the strongest
reason to exclaim. He may, with a sneer, send you back
to China for readers. He may observe, that after the first
or second letter, the iteration of the same simplicity is in-
supportably tedious. But the worst of all is, the public,
in such a case, will anticipate his censures, and leave you,
with all your uninstructive simplicity, to be mauled at
discretion."
" Yes," cried I, "but in order to-avoid his indignation,
and, what I should fear more, that of the public, I would,
in such a case, write with all the knowledge I was master
of. As I am not possessed of much learning, at least I
would not suppress what little I had ; nor would I appear
more stupid than nature made me."—" Here, then," cries
the bookseller, "we should have you entirely in our
power; unnatural, un-Eastern, quite out of character,
erroneously sensible, would be the whole cry. Sir, we
should then hunt you down like a rat."—" Head of my
father !" said I, " sure there are but two ways ; the door
must either be shut or it must be open. I must either be
natural or unnatural."—" Be what you will, we shall criti-
cise you," returned the bookseller, " and prove you a
dunce in spite of your teeth.1 But, Sir, it is time that I
1 " This was obviously introduced as an indirect mode of reply to
occasional objectors to these Letters in the newspapers, when in course
<pb>
I
should come to business. I have just now in the press a
history of China; and if you will but put your name to it
as the author, I shall repay the obligation with gratitude."
—" What, Sir! " replied I, " put my name to a work
which I have not written ? Never, while I retain a proper
respect for the public and myself." The bluntness of my
reply quite abated the ardour of the bookseller's conver-
sation ; and, after about half an hour's disagreeable re-
serve, he, with some ceremony, took his leave, and with-
drew. Adieu.
 LETTER LIT.
To the Same.
THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF DISTINGUISHING MEN IN ENGLAND
BY THEIR DRESS. TWO INSTANCES OF THIS.
IN all other countries, my dear Funa Hoam, the rich are
distinguished by their dress. In Persia, China, and most
parts of Europe, those who are possessed of much gold or
silver, put some of it upon their clothes; but in England,
those who carry much upon their clothes, are remarked
for having but little in their pockets. A tawdry outside
is regarded as a badge of poverty; and those who can sit
at home, and gloat over their thousands in silent satis-
faction, are generally found to do it in plain clothes.
This diversity of thinking from the rest of the world
which prevails here, I was, at first, at a loss to account for;
but am since informed, that it was introduced by au inter-
course between them and their neighbours the French,
who, whenever they came in order to pay these islanders a
visit, were generally very well dressed, and very poor,
daubed with lace, but all the gilding on the outside. By
this means laced clothes have been brought so much into
contempt, that, at present, even their mandarines are
ashamed of finery.
of publication, that the assumed character of a Chinese was not suffi-
ciently preserved—that the letter-writer was too observant, or too well-
informed upon English matters, for his country.—PRIOR.
r
<pb>
I must own myself a convert to English simplicity; I
am no more for ostentation of wealth than of learning:
the person who in company should pretend to be wiser
than others, I am apt to regard as illiterate and ill-bred;
the person whose clothes are extremely fine, I am too apt
to consider as not being possessed of any superiority of
fortune, but resembling those Indians who are found to
wear all the gold they have in the world in a bob at the
nose.
I was lately introduced into a company of the best dressed
men I have seen since my arrival. Upon entering the
room, I was struck with awe at the grandeur of the diffe-
rent dresses. That personage, thought I, in blue and gold
must be some emperor's son; that in green and silver, a
prince of the blood; he in embroidered scarlet, a prime
minister; all first rate noblemen, I suppose, and well-
looking noblemen too. I sat for some time with that un-
easiness which conscious inferiority produces in the inge-
nuous mind, all attention to their discourse. However, I
found their conversation more vulgar than I could have
expected from personages of such distinction: If these,
thought I to myself, be princes, they are the most stupid
princes I have ever conversed with : yet still I continued
to venerate their dress; 'for dress has a kind of mechanical
influence on the mind.1
My friend in black, indeed, did not behave with the same
deference, but contradicted the finest of them all in the
most peremptory tones of contempt. But I had scarce
time to wonder at the imprudence of his conduct, when
I found occasion to be equally surprised at the absurdity
of theirs; for upon the entrance of a middle-aged man,
dressed in a cap, dirty shirt, and boots, the whole circle
seemed diminished of their former importance, and con-
tended who should be first to pay their obeisance to the
stranger. They somewhat resembled a circle of Kalmucs
offering incense to a bear.
Eager to know the cause of so much seeming contradic-
tion, I whispered my friend out of the room, and found
that the august company consisted of no other than a danc-
'-1 Not in the Public Ledger version.—ED.
<pb>
ing master, two fiddlers, and a third-rate actor, all as-
sembled in order to make a set at country dances ; as the
middle-aged gentleman whom I saw enter, was a 'squire
from the country, desirous of learning the new manner of
footing, and smoothing up the rudiments of his rural
minuet.
I was no longer surprised at the authority which my
friend assumed among them—nay, was even displeased
(pardon my Eastern education) that he had not kicked
every creature of them down stairs. " What," said I,
" shall a set of such paltry fellows dress themselves up like
sons of kings, and claim even the transitory respect of half
an hour! There should be some law to restrain so mani-
fest a breach of privilege; they should go from house to
house as in China, with the instruments of their prof ession
strung round their necks ; by this means, we might be
able to distinguish and treat them in a style of becoming
contempt."—" Hold, my friend," replied my companion,
" were your reformation to take place, as dancing masters
and fiddlers now mimic gentlemen in appearance, we should
then find our fine gentlemen conforming to theirs. A beau
might be introduced to a lady of fashion with a fiddle-case
hanging at his neck by a red riband; and, instead of a
cane, might carry a fiddlestick. Though to be as dull as
a first-rate dancing master might be used with proverbial
justice ; yet, dull as he is, many a fine gentleman sets him
up as the proper standard of politeness ; copies not only
the pert vivacity of his air, but the flat insipidity of his
conversation. In short, if you make a law against dancing
masters imitating the fine gentleman, you should with as
much reason enact, that no fine gentleman shall imitate
the dancing master."
After I had left my friend, I made towards home, re-
flecting as I went upon the difficulty of distinguishing men
by their appearance. Invited, however, by the freshness
of the evening, I did not return directly, but went to
ruminate on what had passed in a public garden belonging
to the city. Here, as I sat upon one of the benches, and
felt the pleasing sympathy which nature in bloom inspires,
a disconsolate figure who sat on the other end of the seat,
seemed no way to enjoy the serenity of the season.
^
<pb>
His dress was miserable beyond description : a thread-
bare coat, of the rudest materials ; a shirt, though clean,
yet extremely coarse ; hair that seemed to have been long
unconscious of the comb ; and all the rest of his equipage
impressed with the marks of genuine poverty.
As he continued to sigh, and testify every symptom of
despair, I was naturally led, from a motive of humanity,
to offer comfort and assistance. You know my heart; and
that all who are miserable may claim a place there. The
pensive stranger at first declined any conversation; but at
last perceiving a peculiarity in my accent and manner of
thinking, he began to unfold himself by degrees.
I now found that he was not so very miserable as he at
first appeared; upon my offering him a small piece of
money, he refused my favour, yet without appearing dis-
pleased at my intended generosity. It is true, he some-
times interrupted the conversation with a sigh, and talked
pathetically of neglected merit; yet still I could perceive
a serenity in his countenance, that, upon a closer inspec-
tion, bespoke inward content.
Upon a pause in the conversation, I was going to take
my leave, when he begged I would favour him with my
company home to supper. I was surprised at such a de-
mand from a person of his appearance, but, willing to in-
dulge curiosity, I accepted his invitation; and, though I
felt some repugnance at being seen with one who appeared
so very wretched, went along with seeming alacrity.
Still as he approached nearer home, his good humour
proportionably seemed to increase. At last he stopped,
not at the gate of a hovel, but of a magnificent palace !
When I cast my eyes upon all the sumptuous elegance
which every where presented upon entering, and then when
I looked at my seeming miserable conductor, I could
scarce think that all this finery belonged to him ; yet in
fact it did. Numerous servants ran through the apart-
ments with silent assiduity ; several ladies of beauty, and
magnificently dressed, came to welcome his return; a most
elegant supper was provided: in short, I found the person
whom a little before I had sincerely pitied, to be in reality
a most refined epicure :—one who courted contempt abroad,
in order to feel with keener gust the pleasure of pre-
eminence at home. Adieu.
<pb>
LETTER LIU.
To the Same.
THE ABSURD TASTE FOR OBSCENE AND PERT NOVELS,
SUCH AS ' TRISTRAM SHANDY,' RIDICULED.'
How often have we admired the eloquence of Europe !
that strength of thinking, that delicacy of imagination,
even beyond the efforts of the Chinese themselves. How
were we enraptured with those bold figures which sent
every sentiment with force to the heart. How have we
spent whole days together, in learning those arts by which
European writers got within the passions, and led the
reader as if by enchantment.
But though we have learned most of the rhetorical figures
of the last age, yet there seems to be one or two of great
use here, which have not yet travelled to China. The
figures I mean are called Bawdy and Pertness : none are
more fashionable—none so sure of admirers; they are of
such a nature, that the merest blockhead, by a proper use
of them, shall have the reputation of a wit; they lie level
1 The date of this Letter in the Public Ledger is June 30,1760. There
being no contents heading to the Letter as so first published, there was
then, and until the republication in the ' Citizen' issue, two years
later, no word connecting the censure contained in it more particularly
with ' Tristram Shandy.' In 1760 only the first two volumes of' Tristram
Shandy' were published; but in 1762, when Goldsmith deliberately en-
dorsed, as we may say, his severe criticism by an almost exact republi-
cation of it, and by putting the before-omitted name of Sterne's novel in
the heading, six volumes of ' Tristram Shandy' were out. Thus it would
seem that the criticism is no mere hastily written first impression of the
two first volumes of Sterne's work, but a judgment that Goldsmith
abided by long afterwards. The passage between Goldsmith and Johnson
on Sterne, later still, as told in Boswell's Johnson, is a further proof of
this. Boswell reports (Napier's 8vo. ed., vol. ii., p. 68), " It having been
observed that there was little hospitality in London : JOHNSON. ' Nay,
Sir, any man who has a name, or who has the power of pleasing, will
be very generally invited in London. The man Sterne, I have been told,
has had engagements for three months.' GOLDSMITH. ' And a very dull
fellow.' JOHNSON. ' Why, no, Sir.'" See also Letter LXXV.—ED.
<pb>
to the meanest capacities, and address those passions which
all have, or would be ashamed to disown.
It has been observed, and I believe with some truth, that
it is very difficult for a dunce to obtain the reputation of
a wit; yet, by the assistance of the figure Bawdy, this may
be easily effected, and a bawdy blockhead often passes for
a fellow of smart parts and pretensions. Every object in
nature helps the jokes forward, without scarce any effort
of the imagination. If a lady stands, something very good
may be said upon that; if she happens to fall, with the
help of a little fashionable pruriency, there are forty sly
things ready on the occasion. But a prurient jest has
always been found to give most pleasure to a few very old
gentlemen, who, being in some measure dead toother sen-
sations, feel the force of the allusion with double violence
on the organs of risibility.1
An author who writes in this manner is generally sure,
therefore, of having the very old and the impotent among
his admirers ; for. these he may properly be said to write,
and from these he ought to expect his reward ; his works
being often a very proper succedaneum to cantharides, or
an asafoatida pill. His pen should be considered in the
same light as the squirt of an apothecary, both being
directed at the same generous end.
But though this manner of writing be perfectly adapted
to the taste of gentlemen and ladies of fashion here, yet
still it deserves greater praise in being equally suited to
the most vulgar apprehensions. The very ladies and gen-
tlemen of Benin or Cafraria are in this respect tolerably
polite, and might relish a prurient joke of this kind with
critical propriety; probably, too, with higher gust, as
they wear neither breeches nor petticoats to intercept the
application.
It is certain I never could have expected the ladies here,
biassed as they are by education, capable at once of
bravely throwing off their prejudices, and not only ap-
plauding books in which this figure makes the only merit,
but even adopting it in their own conversation. Yet so it
is; the pretty innocents now carry those books openly in
1 These two paragraphs are somewhat amplified in the Public Ledger.
<pb>
their hands, which formerly were hid under the cushion ;
they now lisp their double meanings with so much grace,
and talk over the raptures they bestow with such little
reserve, that I am sometimes reminded of a custom
among the entertainers in China, who think it a piece of
necessary breeding to whet the appetites of their guests,
by letting them smell dinner in the kitchen, before it is
served up to table.
The veneration we have for many things, entirely pro-
ceeds from their being carefully concealed. Were the
idolatrous Tartar permitted to lift the veil which keeps
his idol from view, it might be a certain method to cure
his future superstition; with what a noble spirit of free-
dom, therefore, must that writer be possessed, who
bravely paints things as they are—who lifts the veil of
modesty—who displays the most hidden recesses of the
temple, and shows the erring people that the object of
their vows is either, perhaps a mouse or a monkey !
However, though this figure be at present so much in
fashion—though the professors of it are so much caressed
by the great, those perfect judges of literary excellence,
—yet it is confessed to be only a revival of what was once
fashionable here before. There was a time, when, by this
very manner of writing, the gentle Tom Durfey, as I read
in English authors, acquired his great reputation, and
became the favourite of a king.1
The works of this orginal genius, though they never
travelled abroad to China, and scarce have reached pos-
terity at home, were once found upon every fashionable
toilet, and made the subject of polite, I mean very polite
conversation. " Has your grace seen Mr. Durfey's last
new thing, the Oylet Hole ?—a most facetious piece ! "—
" Sure, my lord, all the world must have seen it; Durfey
is certainly the most comical creature alive. It is impos-
1 The author of' Wit and Mirth, or Pills to Purge Melancholy,' and
some thirty plays, &c. He was long popular as a song writer and sati-
rist, and was a great favourite of Charles the Second. Addison remem-
bered to have seen this King, more than once, leaning on Tom's shoulder,
and humming over a song with him (vide i Guardian/ No. 67). D'Urfey
also enjo\ed some countenance in King William's and Queen Anne's
court. Nevertheless he died poor, at a great age, Fob. 26, 1723.—
ED.
<pb>
sible to read his things and live. Was there ever any thing
so natural and pretty, as when the 'Squire and Bridget meet
in the cellar ? And then the difficulties they both find
in broaching the beer barrel, are so arch and so ingenious !
We have certainly nothing of this kind in the language." *
In this manner they spoke then, and in this manner
they speak now; for though the successor of Durfey does
not excel him in wit, the world must confess he outdoes
him in obscenity.
There are several very dull fellows, who, by a few me-
chanical helps, sometimes learn to become extremely
brilliant and pleasing, with a little dexterity in the man-
agement of the eyebrows, fingers, and nose. By imitating
a cat, a sow and pigs,—by a loud laugh, and a slap on the
shoulder,—the most ignorant are furnished out for con-
versation. But the writer finds it impossible to throw his
winks, his shrugs, or his attitudes upon paper; he may
borrow some assistance, indeed, by printing his face at the
title page; but, without wit, to pass for a man of inge-
nuity, no other mechanical help but downright obscenity
will suffice. By speaking of some peculiar sensations, we
are always sure of exciting laughter, for the jest does not
lie in the writer, but in the subject.
But Bawdy is often helped on by another figure, called
Pertness; and few indeed are found to excel in one that
are not possessed of the other. As in common conver-
sation, the best way to make the audience laugh is by
first laughing yourself; so, in writing, the properest
manner is to show an attempt at humour, which will
pass upon most for humour in reality. To effect this,
readers must be treated with the most perfect fami-
liarity : in one page the author is to make them a low
bow, and in the next to pull them by the nose ; he must
talk in riddles, and then send them to bed in order to
dream for the solution. He must speak of himself, and
1 " He [D'Urfey] makes all the merriment in our entertainments, and
but for him there would be so miserable a dearth of catches that I fear
they would, sans cMmonic, put either the parson or me upon making
some for them. Any man of any quality, is heartily welcome to the
best toping-table of our gentry, who can roundly hum out some frag-
ments or rhapsodies of his works."—Pope to Henry Cromwell, April
10, 1710, Elwin's edit, of Pope, vol. vi., p. 92.—ED.
<pb>
his chapters, and his manner, and what he would be at,
and his own importance, and his mother's importance,
with the most unpitying prolixity ; now and then testify-
ing his contempt for all but himself, smiling without a
jest, and without wit professing vivacity.1 Adieu.
 LETTER LIV.
To the Same.
THE CHARACTER OF AN IMPORTANT TBIFLER, [BEAU
THOUGH naturally pensive, yet I am fond of gay com-
pany, and take every opportunity of thus dismissing the
mind from duty. From this motive, I am often found in
the centre of a crowd ; and wherever pleasure is to be
sold, am always a purchaser. In those places, without
being remarked by any, I join in whatever goes forward ;
work my passions into a similitude of frivolous earnest-
ness, shout as they shout, and condemn as they happen to
disapprove. A mind thus sunk for a while below its
natural standard, is qualified for stronger flights, as those
first retire who would spring forward with greater vigour.
Attracted by the serenity of the evening, my friend and
I lately went to gaze upon the company in one of the
public walks near the city. Here we sauntered together
for some time, either praising the beauty of such as were
handsome, or the dresses of such as had nothing else to
recommend them. We had gone thus deliberately for-
ward for some time, when, stopping on a sudden, my
1 The first and third editions read "possessing vivacity." Percy's
edition has " professing.'' The Public Ledger version ends thus : —
" Ever smiling without a jest, and without wit possessed of vivacity, he
may use what freedoms he thinks proper, provided he now and then
throws out a hint of being too contemptible for resentment." — ED.
2 This and the following Letter, upon Beau Tibbs and his family, were
afterwards (1765) printed by Goldsmith in his 'Essays' — Nos. X. and
XI. The dates in the Public Ledger were July 2 and Aug. 1, 1760.
The differences of the three versions are slight ; and are mostly noted
below.— ED.
<pb>
friend caught me by the elbow, and led me out of the
public walk. I could perceive by the quickness of his
pace, and by his frequently looking behind, that he was
attempting to avoid somebody who followed: we now
turned to the right, then to the left: as we went forward,
he still went faster, but in vain : the person whom he at-
tempted to escape hunted us through every doubling, and
gained upon us each moment, so that at last we fairly
stood still, resolving to face what we could not avoid.
Our pursuer soon came up, and joined us with all the
familiarity of an old acquaintance. " My dear Drybone,"1
cries he, shaking my friend's hand, " where have you been
hiding this half a century ? Positively I had fancied you
were gone down to cultivate matrimony and your estate in
the country." During the reply, I had an opportunity of
surveying the appearance of our new companion: his hat
was pinched up with peculiar smartness; his looks were
pale, thin, and sharp ; round his neck he wore a broad
black riband, and in his bosom a buckle studded with
glass; his coat was trimmed with tarnished twist; he
wore by his side a sword with a black hilt; and his stock-
ings of silk, though newly washed, were grown yellow by
long service. I was so much engaged with the peculiarity
of his dress, that I attended only to the latter part of my
friend's reply, in which he complimented Mr. Tibbs on the
taste of his clothes, and the bloom in his countenance.
" Pshaw, pshaw ! Will,"2 cried the figure, " no more of
that, if you love me: you know I hate flattery,—on my
soul I do; and yet, to be sure, an intimacy with the great
will improve one's appearance, and a course of venison
will fatten ; and yet, faith, I despise the great as much as
you do; but there are a great many damn'd honest fellows
among them, and we must not quarrel with one half, be-
cause the other wants weeding.3 If they were all such as
my Lord Mudler, one of the most good-natured creatures
1 In the ' Essays' version the Beau calls the Man in Black " Charles."
Both the Public Ledger and the ' Citizen' have " Drybone." See the
notes to Letters XIII., XXVI., XXVII., &c., on the supposed identity
of the Man in Black with Goldsmith's father.—ED.
2 The ' Essays' version has " Charles."—ED.
3 The ' Essays' version reads " wants breeding."—ED.
<pb>
205
that ever squeezed a lemon, I should myself be among the
number of their admirers. I was yesterday to dine at the
Duchess of Piccadilly's. My lord was there. ' Ned,' says
he to me, ' Ned,' says he, ' I'll hold gold to silver I can
tell where you were poaching last night.' ' Poaching, my
lord ?' says I, ' faith you have missed already ; for I staid
at home, and let the girls poach for me. That's my way:
I take a fine woman as some animals do their prey—stand
still, and swoop, they fall into my mouth.' "
" Ah, Tibbs, thou art a happy fellow," cried my com-
panion, with looks of infinite pity ; " I hope your fortune
is as much improved as your understanding in such com-
pany."—"Improved," replied the other; "You shall
know,—but let it go no further—a great secret—five hun-
dred a-year to begin with.—My lord's word of honour for
it. His lordship took me down in his own chariot yester-
day, and we had a tete-a-tete dinner in the country, where
we talked of nothing else."—" I fancy you forget, Sir,"
cried I, " you told us but this moment of your dining
yesterday in town."—" Did I say so? " replied he coolly ;
" to be sure if I said so, it was so—Dined in town ; egad,
now I do remember, I did dine in town ; but I dined in
the country too ; for you must know, my boys, I eat two
dinners. By the by, I am grown as nice as the devil in
my eating. I'll tell you a pleasant affair about that:—
We were a select party of us to dine at Lady Grogram's—an
affected piece, but let it go no farther—a secret —Well,
1 there happened to be no asafcetida in the sauce to a
turkey, upon which,1 says I, " I'll hold a thousand guineas,
and say done first, that—But, dear Drybone, you are an
honest creature ; lend me half-a-crown for a minute or
two, or so, just till but hearkee, ask me for it the
next time we meet, or it may be twenty to one but I forget
to pay you."
When he left us, our conversation naturally turned upon
so extraordinary a character. " His very dress," cries my
friend, " is not less extraordinary than his conduct. If
you meet him this day, you find him in rags; if the next,
in embroidery. With those persons of distinction of whom
'-1 Omitted in the ' Essays' version.—ED.
<pb>
he talks so familiarly, he has scarce a coffeehouse acquain-
tance. However, both for the interests of society, and
perhaps for his own, Heaven has made him poor, and
while all the world perceive his wants, he fancies them
concealed from every eye. An agreeable companion, be-
cause he understands flattery; and all must be pleased
with the first part of his conversation, though all are sure
of its ending with a demand on their purse. While his
youth countenances the levity of his conduct, he may thus
earn a precarious subsistence ; but when age comes on, the
gravity of which is incompatible with buffoonery, then will
he find himself forsaken by all; condemned' in the decline
of life to hang upon some rich family whom he once de-
spised, there to undergo all the ingenuity of studied con-
tempt, to be employed only as a spy upon the servants, or
a bugbear to fright the children into obedience." L Adieu.
LETTEK LV.
To the Same.
THE CHARACTER OF THE TRIFLER CONTINUED : WITH THAT
OF HIS WIFE, HIS HOUSE, AND FURNITURE.
I AM apt to fancy I have contracted a new acquaintance
whom it will be no easy matter to shake off.2 My little
Beau yesterday overtook me again in one of the public
walks, and slapping me on the shoulder, saluted me with
an air of the most perfect familiarity. His dress was the
same as usual, except that he had more powder in his hair,
wore a dirtier shirt, a pair of temple spectacles, and his
hat under his arm.
As I knew him to be a harmless, amusing little thing, I
could not return his smiles with any degree of severity: so
1 Mr. Forster says—" It is supposed that this exquisite sketch [of
Beau TibbsJ had a living original in one of Goldsmith's casual acquain-
tance ; a person named Thornton, once in the army."—ED.
2 The ' Essays' version commences—" There are some acquaintances
whom it is no easy matter to shake off."—ED.
<pb>
we walked forward on terms of the utmost intimacy, and
in a few minutes discussed all the usual topics preliminary
to particular conversation. The oddities that marked his
character, however, soon began to appear; he bowed to
several well-dressed persons, who, by their manner of re-
turning the compliment, appeared perfect strangers. At
intervals he drew out a pocket-book, seeming to take me-
morandums before all the company, with much importance
and assiduity. In this manner he led me through the
length of the whole walk, fretting at his absurdities,
and fancying myself laughed at not less than him by every
spectator.
When we were got to the end of our procession, " Blast
me," cries he, with an air of vivacity, " I never saw the
Park so thin in my life before ! There's no company at all
to-day ; not a single face to be seen."—" No company ! "
interrupted I, peevishly ; " no company where there is such
a crowd? why, man, there's too much. What are the
thousands that have been laughing at us but company ? "
—"Lord, my dear," returned he, with the utmost good
humour, " you seem immensely chagrined ; but, blast me,
when the world laughs at me, I laugh at the world, and
so we are even. My Lord Trip, Bill Squash the Creolian,
and I, sometimes make a party at being ridiculous ; and
so we say and do a thousand things for the joke's sake.
But I see you are grave, and if you are for a fine grave'
sentimental companion, you shall dine with me2 and my
wife to-day ; I must insist on't. I'll introduce you to Mrs.
Tibbs, a lady of as elegant qualifications as any in nature ;
she was bred (but that's between ourselves), under the in-
spection of the Countess of All-night.3 A charming body
of voice; but no more of that,—she will give us a song.
You shall see my little girl too, Carolina Wilhelmina
Amelia Tibbs, a sweet pretty creature: I design her for
my Lord Drumstick's eldest son ; but that's in friendship,
let it go no further: she's but six years old, and yet she
walks a minuet, and plays on the guitar immensely al-
ready. I intend she shall be as perfect as possible in every
 1 The word " grave " is not in the Public Ledger version.—ED.
2 The ' Essays' text reads " dine with my wife," &e.—ED.
3 The ' Essays' text has " Countess of Shoreditch."—ED.
'
<pb>
accomplishment. In the first place, I'll make her a scho-
lar : I'll teach her Greek myself, and learn that language
purposely to instruct her; but let that be a secret."
Thus saying, without waiting for a reply, he took me by
the arm, and hauled me along. We passed through many
dark alleys and winding ways ; for, from some motives to
me unknown, he seemed to have a particular aversion to
every frequented street; at last, however, we got to the
door of a dismal-looking house in the outlets of the town,
where he informed me he chose to reside for the benefit of
the air.
We entered the lower door, which ever seemed to lie
most hospitably open ; and I began to ascend an old and
creaking staircase, when, as he mounted to show me the
way, he demanded, whether I delighted in prospects; to
which answering in the affirmative, " Then," says he, " I
shall show you one of the most charming in the world,
out of my window; we shall see the ships sailing, and the
whole country for twenty miles round, tip top, quite high.
My Lord Swamp would give ten thousand guineas for such
a one; but, as I sometimes pleasantly tell him, I always
love to keep my prospects at home, that my friends may
see me the oftener."
By this time we were arrived as high as the stairs would
permit us to ascend, till we came to what he was face-
tiously pleased to call the first floor down the chimney;
and knocking at the door, a voice1 from within demanded,
" Who's there ? " My conductor answered that it was
him. But this not satisfying the querist, the voice again
repeated the demand; to which he answered louder than
before; and now the door was opened by an old woman
with cautious reluctance.
When we were got in, he welcomed me to his house with
great ceremony, and turning to the old woman, asked where
was her lady? " Good troth," replied she, in a peculiar2
dialect,3 " she's washing your twa shirts at the next door,
because they have taken an oath against lending out the
1 In the ' Essays' it is—" a voice, with a Scotch accent."—ED.
2 "' Gud thro!li,' replied she, in a provincial," &c., is the Public
Ledger reading.—ED.
3 The ' Essays' version has " in the northern dialect."—ED.
<pb>
tub any longer."—" My two shirts ! " ' cried he in a tone
that faltered with confusion, " what does the idiot mean ? "
—" I ken what I mean weel enough," replied the other ;
" she's washing your twa shirts at the next door, because " " Fire and fury," no more of thy stupid explana-
tions ! " cried he; " go and inform her we have got com-
pany. Were that Scotch hag," continued he, turning to
me, " to be for ever in my family, she would never learn
politeness, nor forget that absurd poisonous accent of hers,
or testify the smallest specimen of breeding or high life;
and yet it is very surprising too, as I had her from a Par-
liament man, a friend of mine from the Highlands, one of
the politest men in the world; but that's a secret."
We waited some time for Mrs. Tibbs's arrival, during
which interval I had a full opportunity of surveying the
chamber and all its furniture, which consisted of four
chairs with old wrought bottoms, that he assured me were
his wife's embroidery; a square table that had been once
japanned; a cradle in one corner, a lumbering cabinet in
the other; a broken shepherdess, and a mandarine without
a head, were stuck over the chimney; and round the walls
several paltry unframed pictures, which, he observed, were
all his own drawing. " What do you think, Sir, of that
head in the corner, done in the manner of Grisoni ? there's
the true keeping in it; it is my own face, and though there
happens to be no likeness, a Countess offered me a hun-
dred for its fellow: I refused her, for, hang it, that would
be mechanical you know."
The wife at last made her appearance, at once a slattern
and a coquette; much emaciated, but still carrying the
remains of beauty. She made twenty apologies for being
seen in such odious dishabille, but hoped to be excused, as
she had stayed out all night at the gardens3 with the
Countess, who was excessively fond of the horns. " And,
indeed, my dear," added she, turning to her husband, " his
lordship drank your health in a bumper."—" Poor Jack !"
.cries he, " a dear good-natured creature, I know he loves
1 The first edition had " twa shirts," as afterwards had the ' Essays'
text.—ED.
2 For " Fire and fury" the Public Ledger version has " Well."—ED.
3 The ' Essays' have—" Vauxhall gardens."—ED.
III. P
<pb>
me. But I hope, my dear, you have given orders for
dinner; you need make no great preparations neither, there
are but three of us; something elegant, and little will
do,1—a turbot, an ortolan, a " " Or what do you think,
my dear," interrupts the wife, " of a nice pretty bit of ox-
cheek, piping hot, and dressed with a little of my own
sauce?"—"The very thing!" replies he; "it will eat
best with some smart bottled beer:2 but be sure to let us
have the sauce his Grace was so fond of. I hate your
immense loads of meat;3 that is country all over;3 extremely
disgusting to those who are in the least acquainted with
high life."
By this time my curiosity began to abate, and my appe-
tite to increase; the company of fools may at first make
us smile, but at last never fails of rendering us melan-
choly : I therefore pretended to recollect a prior engage-
ment, and, after having shown my respect to the house,
4 according to the fashion of the English,4 by giving the old
servant a piece of money at the door, I took my leave;
6 Mr. Tibbs assuring me, that dinner, if I stayed, would be
ready at least in less than two hours.5
LETTER LVI.
From Fum Hoam to Altangi, the Discontented Wanderer.
SOME THOUGHTS ON THE PRESENT SITUATION OF AFFAIES
THE distant sounds of music, that catch new sweetness
as they vibrate through the long-drawn valley, are not
1 The Ledger has "a bechamele, a turbot," &c. Bechamel was a
white broth, invented by Louis XIV.'ths steward, the Marquis <!e
Bechamel.—ED.
2 The Ledger version reads—"some porter." See note on London
porter, with the article on Hanway " on Tea " in vol. iv.—ED.
3-s Not in the Ledger version.—ED. •-* Omitted in the' Essays.'—ED.
'-' Not in the Ledger version.—ED.
8 Dated July 8, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
211
more pleasing to the ear than the tidings of a far distant
friend.1
I have just received two hundred of thy letters by the
Eussian caravan, descriptive of the manners of Europe.
You have left it to geographers to determine the size of
their mountains and extent of their lakes, seeming only
employed in discovering the genius, the government, and
disposition of the people.
In those letters I perceive a journal of the operations of
your mind upon whatever occurs, rather than a detail of
your travels from one building to another; of your taking
a draught of this ruin, or that obelisk ; of paying so many
tomans for this commodity, or laying up a proper store for
the passage of some new wilderness.
From your account of Eussia, I learn that this nation
is again relaxing into pristine barbarity; that its great
emperor wanted a life of a hundred years more, to bring
about his vast design. A savage people may be resem-
bled to their own forests : a few years are sufficient to clear
away the obstructions to agriculture ; but it requires many,
ere the ground acquires a proper degree of fertility : the
Eussians, attached to their ancient prejudices, again renew
their hatred to strangers, and indulge every former brutal
excess. So true it is, that the revolutions of wisdom are
slow and difficult; the revolutions of folly or ambition
precipitate and easy. " We are not to be astonished,"
says Confucius,2 " that the wise walk more slowly in their
road to virtue, than fools in their passage to vice ; since
passion drags us along, while wisdom only points out the
way."
The German empire, that remnant of the majesty of
ancient Bome, appears, from your account, on the eve of
dissolution. The members of its vast body want every tie
of government to unite them, and seem feebly held to-
gether only by their respect for ancient institutions. The
very name of country and countrymen, which in other
nations makes one of the strongest bonds of government,
1 The Ptiblic Ledger has " my far distant friend."—ED.
2 Though this fine maxim be not found in the Latin edition of the
morals of Confucius, yet we find it ascribed to him by Le Comte.—
Etat present de la Chine, vol. i. p. 348.—GOLDSMITH.
<pb>
has been here for some time laid aside; each of its inhabi-
tants seeming more proud of being called from the petty
state which gives him birth, than by the more well-known
title of German.
This government may be regarded in the light of a
severe master, and a feeble opponent. The states which
are now subject to the laws of the empire, are only watch-
ing a proper occasion to fling off the yoke, and those which
are become too powerful to be compelled to obedience, now
begin to think of dictating in their turn. The struggles
in this state are, therefore, not in order to preserve, but
to destroy the ancient constitution : if one side succeeds,
the government must become despotic; if the other, seve-
ral states will subsist without even nominal subordina-
tion ; but in either case, the Germanic constitution will be
no more.
Sweden, on the contrary, though now seemingly a strenu-
ous assertor of its liberties, is probablyL only hastening on
to despotism. Their senators, while they pretend to vin-
dicate the freedom of the people, are only establishing
their own independence. The deluded people will, how-
ever, at last perceive the miseries of an aristocratical govern-
ment ; they will perceive that the administration of a society
of men, is ever more painful than that of one only. They
will fly from this most oppressive of all forms, where one
single member is capable of controlling the whole, to take
refuge under the throne, which will ever be attentive to
their complaints. No people long endure an aristocratical
government, when they can apply elsewhere for redress.
The lower orders of people may be enslaved for a time by
a number of tyrants, but, upon the first opportunity, they
will ever take a refuge in despotism or democracy.
As the Swedes are making concealed approaches to des-
potism, the French, on the other hand, are imperceptibly
vindicating themselves into freedom. When I consider
that those parliaments (the members of which are all
created by the court, the presidents of which can act only
by immediate direction) presume even to mention privi-
leges and freedom, who, till of late, received directions
1 The Ledger has " probably (like Denmark of late)."—ED.
<pb>
213
from the throne with implicit humility; when this is con-
sidered, I cannot help fancying that the genius of freedom
has entered that kingdom in disguise. If they have but
three weak monarchs more successively on the throne, the
mask will be laid aside, and the country will certainly once
more be free.1
When I compare the figure which the Dutch make in
Europe with that they assume in Asia, I am struck with
surprise. In Asia, I find them the great lords of all the
Indian seas ; in Europe, the timid inhabitants of a paltry
state. No longer the sons of freedom, but of avarice ; no
longer assertors of their rights by courage, but by nego-
tiations ; fawning on those who insult them, and crouch-
ing under the rod of every neighbouring power. Without
a friend to save them in distress, and without virtue to
save themselves ; their government is poor, and their
private wealth will serve but to invite some neighbouring
invader.2
1 long with impatience for your letters from England,
Denmark, Holland, and Italy; yet why wish for relations
which only describe new calamities, which show that am-
bition and avarice are equally terrible in every region!
Adieu.
' This was written in 1760, and Goldsmith is entitled to some credit
for his political sagacity in perceiving that the existing institutions of
France were about to undergo a great change. His prediction was
indeed verified somewhat sooner than he contemplated ; but no human
foresight could anticipate the rapid progress and fearful catastrophe of
the bloody revolution of 1792. The French people, with all their refine-
ment, were incapable of appreciating or long preserving their recovered
freedom.—B.
2 See ' Traveller,' 11. 313, &c.—
" Heavens ! how unlike their Belgic sires of old! " &c.
Also Letter CXVIII. of the ' Citizen,' on the Dutch at the court of
Japan.—ED.
<pb>
LETTER LV11.
From Lien Chi Altangj, to Fum Hoam, First President, &c.
THE DIFFICULTY OF RISING IN LITERARY REPUTATION
WITHOUT INTRIGUE OR BICHES.'
I HAVE frequently admired the manner of criticising in
China, where the learned are assembled in a body to judge
of every new publication ; to examine the merits of the
work without knowing the circumstances of the author;
and then to usher it into the world with proper marks of
respect or reprobation.
In England, there are no such tribunals erected ; but if
a man thinks proper to be a judge of genius, few will be
at the pains to contradict his pretensions. If any choose
to be critics, it is but saying they are critics, and from that
time forward, they become invested with full power and
authority over every caitiff who aims at their instruction
or entertainment.
As almost every member of society has, by this means,
a vote in literary transactions, it is no way surprising to
find the rich leading the way here, as in other common
concerns of life ; to see them either bribing the numerous
herd of voters by their interest, or brow-beating them by
their authority.
A great man says, at his table, that such a book " is no
bad thing." Immediately the praise is carried off by five
flatterers, to be dispersed at twelve different coffeehouses,2
from whence it circulates, still improving as it proceeds,
through forty-five houses, where cheaper liquors are sold;
from thence it is carried away by the honest tradesman to
his own fireside, where the applause is eagerly caught up
by his wife and children, who have been long taught to
regard his judgment as the standard of perfection. Thus,
when we have traced a wide extended literary reputation
ED.
1 Dated July 9, 1760, in the Public Ledger.-E.it.
See notes to the essay on ' Rejoicings for Victory' in vol. if. —
<pb>
215
up to its original source, we shall find it derived from some
great man, who has, perhaps, received all his education
and English from a tutor of Berne, or a dancing master of
Picardy.
The English are people of good sense; and I am the
more surprised to find them swayed in their opinions by
men who often, from their very education, are incompetent
judges. Men who, being always bred in affluence, see the
world only on one side, are surely improper judges of hu-
man nature: they may, indeed, describe a ceremony, a
pageant, or a ball; but how can they pretend to dive into
the secrets of the human heart, who have been nursed up
only in forms, and daily behold nothing but the same in-
sipid adulation smiling upon every face? Few of them
have been bred in that best of schools, the school of adver-
sity ; and, by what I can learn, fewer still have been bred
in any school at all.
From such a description, one would think, that a dron-
ing duke, or a dowager duchess, was not possessed of more
just pretensions to taste than persons of less quality ; and
yet whatever the one or the other may write or praise, shall
pass for perfection, without further examination. A noble-
man has but to take a pen, ink, and paper, write away
through three large volumes, and then sign his name to
the title-page ; though the whole might have been before
more disgusting than his own rent-roll, yet signing his
name and title gives value to the deed ; title being alone
equivalent to taste, imagination, and genius.1
As soon as a piece, therefore, is published, the first ques-
tions are, Who is the author? Does he keep a coach?
Where lies his estate ? What sort of table does he keep ?
If he happens to be poor, and unqualified for such a scru-
tiny, he and his works sink into irremediable obscurity ;
and too late he finds, that having fed upon turtle is a more
ready way to fame than having digested Tully.
1 The history of the origin and popularity of Goldsmith's own ' His-
tory of England in Letters from a Nobleman to his Son,' a work which
was for years attributed to Lord Chesterfield and other noblemen, is
a case in point. This 'History' was first published in 1764. See
' Life,' vol. i., p. 21; also the Preface to the Nobleman Letters in vol. iv.
—ED.
<pb>
The poor devil against whom fashion has set its face
vainly alleges, that he has been bred in every part of
Europe where knowledge was to be sold; that he has
grown pale in the study of nature and himself; his works
may please upon the perusal, but his pretensions to fame
are entirely disregarded: he is treated like a fiddler, whose
music, though liked, is not much praised, because he lives
by it; while a gentleman performer, though the most
wretched semper alive, throws the audience into raptures.
The fiddler, indeed, may in such a case console himself by
thinking, that while the other goes off with all the praise,
he runs away with all the money: but here the parallel
drops ; for while the nobleman triumphs in unmerited ap-
plause, the author by profession steals off with—nothing.
The poor, therefore, here, who draw their pens auxiliary
to the laws of their country, must think themselves very
happy if they find, not fame, but forgiveness : and yet they
are hardly treated ; for, as every country grows more polite
the press becomes more useful; and writers become more
necessary, as readers ate supposed to increase. In a-
polished society, that man, though in rags, who has the
power of enforcing virtue from the press, is of more real
use than forty stupid bramins, or bonzes, or guebres,
though they preached never so often, never so loud, or
never so long. That man, though in rags, who is capable
of deceiving even indolence into wisdom, and who professes
amusement, while he aims at reformation, is more useful in
refined society than twenty cardinals, with all their scarlet,
and tricked out in all the fopperies of scholastic finery.
LETTER LVIII.
To the Same.
A VISITATION DINNEB DESCRIBED.1
As the man in black takes every opportunity of intro-
ducing me to such company as may serve to indulge my
speculative temper, or gratify my curiosity, I was, by his.
influence, lately invited to a visitation dinner. To under-
1 Dated July 18, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
217
stand this term, you must know, that it was formerly the
custom here for the principal priests to go about the
country once a-year, and examine upon the spot, whether
those of subordinate orders did their duty, or were qualified
for the task; whether their temples were kept in proper
repair or the laity pleased with their administration.
Though a visitation of this nature was very useful, yet
it was found to be extremely troublesome, and for many
reasons utterly inconvenient; for, as the principal priest*
were obliged to attend at court, in order to solicit prefer-
ment, it was impossible they could at the same time
attend in the country, which was quite out of the road to-
promotion: if we add to this the gout, which has been
time immemorial a clerical disorder here, together with
the bad wine, and ill-dressed provisions that must in-
fallibly be served up by the way, it was not strange that
the custom has been long discontinued. At present,
therefore, every head of the church, instead of going^
about to visit his priests, is satisfied if his priests come in
a body once a-year to visit him ; by this means the duty
of half a-year is despatched in a day. When assembled,
he asks each in turn how they have behaved, and are
liked; upon which, those who have neglected their duty,
or are disagreeable to their congregation, no doubt accuse
themselves, and tell him all their faults, for which he
reprimands them most severely.
The thoughts of being introduced into a company of
philosophers and learned men, (for such I conceived
them) gave me no small pleasure. I expected our enter-
tainment would resemble those sentimental banquets, so
finely described by Xenophon and Plato: I was hoping
some Socrates would be brought in from the door, in order
to harangue upon divine love; but as for eating and
drinking, I had prepared myself to be disappointed in
that particular. I was apprised that fasting and temper-
ance were tenets strongly recommended to the professors-
of Christianity, and I had seen the frugality and mortifica-
tion of the priests of the East; so that I expected an
entertainment where we should have much reasoning and
little meat.1
1 The Ledger has—" much reasoning and little food."—ED.
"
<pb>
Upon being introduced, I confess I found no great signs
of mortification in the faces or persons of the company.
However, I imputed their florid looks to temperance, and
their corpulency to a sedentary way of living. I saw
several preparations, indeed, for dinner, but none for phi-
losophy. The company seemed to gaze upon the table
with silent expectation; but this I easily excused. Men
of wisdom, thought I, are ever slow of speech; they
deliver nothing unadvisedly. " Silence," says Confucius,
" is a friend that will never betray." They are now pro-
bably inventing maxims or hard sayings for their mutual
instruction, when some one shall think proper to begin.
My curiosity was now wrought up to the highest pitch;
I impatiently looked round to see if any were going to in-
terrupt the mighty pause; when at last one of the com-
pany declared, that there was a sow in his neighbourhood
that farrowed fifteen pigs at a litter. ' This I thought a
Tery preposterous beginning;' but just as another was
going to second the remark, dinner was served, which in-
terrupted the conversation for that time.
The appearance of dinner, which consisted of a variety
of dishes, seemed to diffuse new cheerfulness upon every
face; so that I now expected the philosophical conversa-
tion to begin, as they improved in good humour. The
principal priest, however, opened his mouth with only
observing, that the venison had not been kept enough,
though he had given strict orders for having it killed ten
days before. " I fear," continued he, " it will be found to
want the true heathy flavour; you will find nothing of the
original wildness in it." A priest, who sat next him,
having smelt it, and wiped his nose, " Ah, my good lord,"
«ries he, " you are too modest, it is perfectly fine; every
body knows that nobody understands keeping venison with
your lordship."—" Ay, and partridges too," interrupted
another ; " I never find them right any where else." His
lordship was going to reply, when a third took off the
attention of the company, by recommending the pig as
inimitable. " I fancy, my lord," continues he, " it has
been smothered in its own blood."—" If it has been
'.' Not in the Ledger version.—ED.
<pb>
219
smothered in its blood," cried a facetious member, help-
ing himself, " we'll now smother it in egg sauce." This
poignant piece of humour produced a long loud laugh,
which the facetious brother observing, and now that he
was in luck, willing to second his blow, assured the com-
pany he would tell them a good story about that: " As
good a story," cries he, bursting into a violent fit of
laughter himself, " as ever you heard in your lives.
There was a farmer in my parish who used to sup upon
wild ducks and flummery ; so this farmer " " Doctor
Marrowfat," cried his lordship, interrupting him, " give
me leave to drink your health;" " so—being fond of
wild ducks and flummery, " " Doctor," adds a gen-
tleman who sat next him, " let me advise you to a wing of
this turkey;"—" so this farmer being fond " "Hob
[and] nob, Doctor, which do you choose, white or red ? "
—" so, being fond of wild ducks and flummery; "
" Take care of your band, Sir, it may dip in the gravy."
The Doctor, now looking round, found not a single eye
disposed to listen ; wherefore, calling for a glass of wine,
he gulped down the disappointment and the tale in a
bumper.
The conversation now began to be little more than a
rhapsody of exclamations : as each had pretty well satis-
iied his own appetite, he now found sufficient time to
press others. " Excellent! the very thing! let me recom-
mend the pig." " Do but taste the bacon! never ate a
better thing in my life: exquisite.! delicious ! " This
edifying discourse continued through three courses, which
lasted as many hours, till every one of the company was
unable to swallow or utter any thing more.
It is very natural for men, who are abridged in one
excess, to break into some other. The clergy here, par-
ticularly those who are advanced in years, think if they
are abstemious with regard to women and wine, they may
indulge their other appetites without censure. Thus some
are found to rise in the morning only to a consultation
with their cook about dinner, and, when that has been
swallowed, make no other use of their faculties (if they
have any) but to ruminate on the succeeding meal.
A debauch in wine is even more pardonable than this,
<pb>
since one glass insensibly leads on to another, and, instead
of sating, whets the appetite. The progressive steps to it
are cheerful and seducing; the grave are animated, the
melancholy relieved, and there is even classic authority to
countenance the excess. But in eating, after nature is
once satisfied, every additional morsel brings stupidity
and distempers with it, and, as one of their own poets
expresses it,—
" The soul subsides, and wickedly inclines
To seem but mortal, even in sound divines."'
Let me suppose, after such a meal as this I have been
describing, while all the company are sitting in lethargic
silence round the table, grunting under a load of soup,
pig, pork, and bacon; let me suppose, I say, some hungry
beggar, with looks of want, peeping through one of the
windows, and thus addressing the assembly: " Prithee,
pluck those napkins from your chins; after nature is
satisfied, all that you eat extraordinary is my property,
and I claim it as mine. It was given you in order to re-
lieve me, and not to oppress yourselves. How can they
comfort or instruct others, who can scarce feel their own
existence, except from the unsavoury returns of an ill-
digested meal ? But though neither you nor the cushions
you sit upon will hear me, yet the world regards the ex-
cesses of its teachers with a prying eye, and notes their
conduct with double severity." I know no other answer
any one of the company could make to such an expostula-
tion but this: " Friend, you talk of our losing a character,
and being disliked by the world; well, and supposing all
this to be true, what then! who cares for the world P
We'll preach for the world, and the world shall pay us for
preaching, whether we like each other or not." *
1 Pope: Satire II., 11. 79-80.—ED.
2 Mr. Forster thought this picture of the " smoking, reading, claret-
drinking, toadying, gormandising, good-humoured parsons " of the latter
half of the last century as not overdrawn, and instanced the character
of Dr. Warner in George Selwyn's ' Correspondence' as similar to that of
Dr. Marrowfat. See Forster's ' Life of Goldsmith,' 1854, vol. i., p. 278.
—ED.
<pb>
LETTER LIX.
From Hingpo, to Lien Chi Altangi, by the way of Moscow.
THE CHINESE PHILOSOPHER'S SON ESCAPES WITH THE
BEAUTIFUL CAPTIVE FROM SLAVERY.'
You will probably be pleased to see my letter dated
from Terki, a city which lies beyond the bounds of the
Persian empire: here, blessed with security, with all that
is dear, I double my raptures by communicating them to
you: the mind sympathising with the freedom of the
body, my whole soul is dilated in gratitude, love, and
praise.
Yet, were my own happiness all that inspired my pre-
sent joy, my raptures might justly merit the imputation
of self-interest; but when I think that the beautiful Zelis
is also free, forgive my triumph when I boast of having
rescued from captivity the most deserving object upon
earth.
You remember the reluctance she testified at being
obliged to marry the tyrant she hated. Her compliance
at last was only feigned, in order to gain time to try some
future means of escape. During the interval between her
promise and the intended performance of it, she came un-
discovered one evening to the place where I generally
retired after the fatigues of the day : her appearance was
like that of an aerial genius when it descends to minister
comfort to undeserved distress ; the mild lustre of her eye
served to banish my timidity; her accents were sweeter
than the echo of some distant symphony. " Unhappy
stranger," said she, in the Persian language, "you here
perceive one more wretched than thyself! All this solem-
nity of preparation, this elegance of dress, and the
number of my attendants, serve but to increase my mise-
ries : if you have courage to rescue an unhappy woman
from approaching ruin, and our detested tyrant, you may
1 The dates of this and the following Letter in the Public Ledger arc
July 21 and 24 respectively.—ED.
<pb>
depend upon my future gratitude." I bowed to the
ground, and she left me filled with rapture and astonish-
ment. Night brought me no rest, nor could the ensuing
morning calm the anxieties of my mind. I projected a
thousand methods for her delivery; but each, when strictly
examined, appeared impracticable : in this uncertainty the
evening again arrived, and I placed myself on my former
station in hopes of a repeated visit. After some short
expectation, the bright perfection again appeared: I
bowed, as before, to the ground ; when raising me up, she
observed, that the time was not to be spent in useless
ceremony ; she observed that the day following was ap-
pointed for the celebration of her nuptials, and that
something was to be done that very night for our mutual
deliverance. I offered with the utmost humility to pursue
whatever scheme she should direct: upon which she pro-
posed that instant to scale the garden wall, adding, that
she had prevailed upon a female slave, who was now waiting
at the appointed place, to assist her with a ladder.
Pursuant to this information I led her trembling to the
place appointed; but instead of the slave we expected to
see, Mostadad himself was there awaiting our arrival: the
wretch in whom we had confided, it seems, had betrayed
our design to her master, and he now saw the most con-
vincing proofs of her information. He was just going to
draw his sabre, when a principle of avarice repressed his
fury; and he resolved, after a severe chastisement, to dis-
pose of me to another master; in the meantime ordering
me to be confined in the strictest manner, and the next day
to receive a hundred blows on the soles of my feet.
When the morning came, I was led out in order to re-
ceive the punishment, which, from the severity with which
it is generally inflicted upon slaves, is worse even than
death.
A trumpet was to be the signal for the solemnization of
the nuptials of Zelis, and for the infliction of my punish-
ment. Each ceremony, to me equally dreadful, was just
going to begin, when we were informed that a large party
of Circassian Tartars had invaded the town, and were lay-
ing all in ruin. Every person now thought only of saving
himself: I instantly unloosed the cords with which I was
<pb>
1
bound, and seizing a scimitar from one of the slaves who
had not courage to resist me, flew to the women's apart-
ment where Zelis was confined, dressed out for the intended
nuptials. I bade her follow me without delay, and going
forward, cut my way through the eunuchs, who made but
a faint resistance. The whole city was now a scene of con-
flagration and terror; every person was willing to save
himself, unmindful of others. In this confusion, seizing
upon two of the fleetest coursers in the stables of Mos-
tadad, we fled north ward towards the kingdom of Circassia.
As there were several others flying in the same manner, we
passed without notice, and in three days arrived at Terki,
a city that lies in a valley within the bosom of the frowning
mountains of Caucasus.
Here, free from every apprehension of danger, we enjoy
all those satisfactions which are consistent with virtue:
though I find my heart at intervals give way to unusual
passions, yet such is my admiration for my fair companion,
that I lose even tenderness in distant respect. Though
her person demands particular regard even among the
beauties of Circassia, yet is her mind far more more lovely.
How very different is a woman who thus has cultivated her
understanding, and been refined into delicacy of sentiment,
from the daughters of the East, whose education is only
formed to improve the person, and make them more
tempting objects of prostitution ! Adieu.
LETTER LX.
From Hingpo to Lien Chi Altangi. j
THE HISTORY OF THE BEAUTIFUL CAPTIVE.
WHEN sufliciently refreshed after the fatigues of our
precipitate flight, my curiosity, which had been restrained
by the appearance of immediate danger, now began Jto-
revive: I longed to know by what distressful accidents
my fair fugitive became a captive, and could not avoid
testifying a surprise how so much beauty could be in-
1
<pb>
Tolved in the calamities from whence she had been so lately
rescued.
" Talk not of personal charms," cried she, with emotion,
" since to them I owe every misfortune. Look round on
the numberless beauties of the country where we are, and
see how Nature has poured its charms upon every face; and
yet by this profusion Heaven would seem to show how little
it regards such a blessing, since the gift is lavished upon
a nation of prostitutes.
" I perceive you desire to know my story, and your
curiosity is not so great as my impatience to gratify it: I
find a pleasure in telling past misfortunes to any, but when
my deliverer is pleased with the relation, my pleasure is
prompted by duty.
1" I was born in a country far to the west, where the
men are braver, and the women more fair, than those of
Oircassia; where the valour of the hero is guided by wis-
dom, and where delicacy of sentiment points the shafts of
female beauty. I was the only daughter of an officer in
the army, the child of his age, and as he used fondly to ex-
press it, the only chain that bound him to the world, or
made his life pleasing. His station procured him an ac-
quaintance with men of greater rank and fortune than
himself, and his regard for me induced him to bring me
into every family where he was acquainted: Thus I was
early taught all the elegancies and fashionable foibles of
such as the world calls polite, and, though without fortune
myself, was taught to despise those who lived as if they
were poor.
" My intercourse with the great, and my affectation of
grandeur, procured me many lovers; but want of fortune
1 This story bears a striking similitude to the real history of Miss
S d, who accompanied Lady W e in her, retreat near Florence,
and which the editor had from her own mouth.—GOLDSMITH.'
1 In this note in the Public Ledger we have " Mrs. W e " instead
of" Lady \V e," and the clause " and which," &c., does not appear.
Sir James Prior identifies " Miss S d" with the eccentric daughter
of Mr. S. Rolle, of Haynton, Devon, who married Robert, afterwards
second Lord Orford, and afterwards Mr. Shirley, the son of Lord
Ferrars. See also Cunningham's edition of Walpole's Letters, 1857-59,
vol. i., pp. 152, 347, &c.—ED.
<pb>
deterred them all from any other views than those of pass-
ing the present moment agreeably, or of meditating my
future ruin. In every company I found myself addressed
in a warmer strain of passion than other ladies who were
superior in point of rank and beauty ; and this I imputed
to an excess of respect, which in reality proceeded from
very different motives.
" Among the number of such as paid me their addresses,
was a gentleman, a friend of my father, rather in the de-
cline of life, with nothing remarkable either in his person
or address to commend him. His age, which was about
forty, his fortune, which was moderate, and barely suffi-
cient to support him, served to throw me off my guard, so
that I considered him as the only sincere admirer I had.
" Designing lovers in the decline of life are ever most
dangerous. Skilled in all the weaknesses of the sex, they
seize each favourable opportunity, and by having less pas-
sion than youthful admirers, have less real respect, and
therefore less timidity. This insidious wretch used a thou-
sand arts to succeed in his base designs, all which I saw,
but imputed to different views, because I thought it absurd
to believe the real motives.
" As he continued to frequent my father's, the friendship
between them became every day greater; and at last, from
the intimacy with which he was received, I was taught to
look upon him as a guardian and a friend. Though I
never loved, yet I esteemed him ; and this was enough to
make me wish for a union, for which he seemed desirous,
but to which he feigned several delays; while, in the mean-
time, from a false report of our being married, every other
admirer forsook me.
" I was at last, however, awakened from the delusion, by
an account of his being just married to another young lady
with a considerable fortune. This was no great mortifica-
tion to me, as I had always regarded him merely from
prudential motives; but it had a very different effect upon
my father, who, rash and passionate by nature, and besides,
stimulated by a mistaken notion of military honour, up-
braided his friend in such terms, that a challenge was soon
given and accepted.
" It was about midnight when I was awakened by a
TII. Q
<pb>
message from my father, who desired to see me that
moment. I rose with some surprise, and following the
messenger, attended only by another servant, came to a
field not far from the house, where I found him, the
assertor of my honour, my only friend and supporter, the
tutor and companion of my youth, lying on one side, covered
over with blood, and just expiring! No tears streamed
down my cheeks, nor sigh escaped from my breast, at an
object of such terror. I sat down, and supporting his aged
head in my lap, gazed upon the ghastly visage with an
agony more poignant even than despairing madness. The
servants were gone for more assistance. In this gloomy
stillness of the night no sounds were heard but his agoniz-
ing respirations; no object was presented but his wounds,
which still continued to stream. With silent anguish I
hung over his dear face, and with my hands strove to stop
the blood as it flowed from his wounds: he seemed at first
insensible, but at last, turning his dying eyes upon me,
' My dear, dear child,' cried he; ' dear though you have
forgotten your own honour and stained mine, I will yet
forgive you; by abandoning virtue you have undone me
and yourself, yet take my forgiveness with the same com-
passion I wish Heaven may pity me.' He expired. All
my succeeding happiness fled with him. Reflecting that
I was the cause of his death, whom only I loved upon
earth, accused of betraying the honour of his family with
his latest breath, conscious of my own innocence, yet with-
out even a possibility of vindicating it, without fortune or
friends to relieve or pity me, abandoned to infamy and the
wide censuring world, I called out upon the dead body
that lay stretched before me, and in the agony of my heart
asked, why he could have left me thus P—' Why, my dear,
my only papa, why could you ruin me thus and yourself for
ever ? Oh, pity and return, since there is none but you to
comfort me !'
" I soon found that I had real cause for sorrow; that I
was to expect no compassion from my own sex, nor assis-
tance from the other; and that reputation was much more
useful in our commerce with mankind, than really to de-
serve it. Wherever I came, I perceived myself received
either with contempt or detestation; or whenever I was
<pb>
civilly treated, it was from the most base and ungenerous
motives.
" Thus driven from the society of the virtuous, I was at
last, in order to dispel the anxieties of insupportable
solitude, obliged to take up with the company of those
whose characters were blasted like my own; but who per-
haps deserved their infamy. Among this number was a
lady of the first distinction, whose character the public
thought proper to brand even with greater infamy than
mine. A similitude of distress soon united us; I knew
that general reproach had made her miserable ; and I had
learned to regard misery as an excuse for guilt. Though
this lady had not virtue enough to avoid reproach, yet she
had too much delicate sensibility not to feel it. She there-
fore proposed our leaving the country where we were born,
and going to live in Italy, where our characters and mis-
fortunes would be unknown. With this I eagerly complied,
and we soon found ourselves in one of the most charming
retreats in the most beautiful province of that enchanting
country.
" Had my companion chosen this as a retreat for injured
virtue, a harbour where we might look with tranquillity on
the distant angry world, I should have been happy; but
very different was her design; she had pitched upon this
situation only to enjoy those pleasures in private, which
she had not sufficient effrontery to satisfy in a more open
manner. A nearer acquaintance soon showed me the vicious
part of her character; her mind, as well as her body,
seemed formed only for pleasure ; she was sentimental
only as it served to protract the immediate enjoyment.
Formed for society alone, she spoke infinitely better than
she wrote, and wrote infinitely better than she lived. A
person devoted to pleasure often leads the most miserable
life imaginable; such was her case; she considered the
natural moments of languor as insupportable, passed all
her hours between rapture and anxiety; ever in an extreme
of agony or of bliss. She felt a pain as sincere for want of
appetite, as the starving wretch who wants a meal. In
those intervals she usually kept her bed, and rose only
when in expectation of some new enjoyment. The luxu-
riant air of the country, the romantic situation of her
<pb>
palace, and the genius of a people whose only happiness
lies in sensual refinement, all contributed to banish the
remembrance of her native country.
" But though such a life gave her pleasure, it had a very
different effect upon me ; I grew every day more pensive,
and my melancholy was regarded as an insult upon her
good humour. I now perceived myself entirely unfit for
all society; discarded from the good, and detesting the
infamous, I seemed in a state of war with every rank of
people; that virtue, which should have been my protection
in the world, was here my crime ; in short, detesting life,
I was determined to become a recluse, to leave a world
where I found no pleasure that could allure me to stay.
Thus determined, I embarked in order to go by sea to
Rome, where I intended to take the veil: but even in so
short a passage my hard fortune still attended me; our
ship was taken by a Barbary corsair; the whole crew, and
I among the number, being made slaves. It carries too
much the air of romance to inform you of my distresses or
obstinacy in this miserable state ; it is enough to observe,
that I have been bought by several masters, each of whom,
perceiving my reluctance, rather than use violence, sold me
to another, till it was my happiness to be at last rescued
by you."
Thus ended her relation, which I have abridged, but as
soon as we are arrived at Moscow, for which we intend to
set out shortly, you shall be informed of all more particu-
larly. In the meantime, the greatest addition to my hap-
piness will be to hear of yours. Adieu.
<pb>
LETTEE LXI.
From Lien Chi Altangi to Hingpo.
PROPER LESSONS TO A YOUTH ENTERING THE WORLD ;
WITH FABLES SUITED TO THE OCCASION.1
THE news of your freedom lifts the load of former
anxiety from my mind ; I can now think of my son with-
out regret, applaud his resignation under calamities, and
his conduct in extricating himself from them.
You are now free, just let loose from the bondage of a
hard master: this is the crisis of your fate; and as you
now manage fortune, succeeding life will be marked with
happiness or misery. A few years perseverance in pru-
dence, which at your age is but another name for virtue,
will ensure comfort, pleasure, tranquillity, esteem ; too
eager an enjoyment of every good that now offers will re-
verse the medal, and present you with poverty, anxiety,
remorse, contempt.
As it has been observed, that none are better qualified
to give others advice than those who have taken the least
of it themselves ; so in this respect I find myself perfectly
authorized to offer mine,2 even though I should waive my
paternal authority upon this occasion.2
The most usual way among young men who have no
resolution of their own, is first to ask one friend's advice,
and follow it for some time; then to ask advice of another,
and turn to that; so of a third: still unsteady, always
changing. However, be assured, that every change of this
nature is for the worse: people may tell you of your
being unfit for some peculiar occupations in life ; but heed
them not; whatever employment you follow with perse-
verance and assiduity, will be found fit for you: it will be
your support in youth, and comfort in age. In learning
1 This letter, after its two opening paragraphs, constitutes, with a
few alterations, essay XII. in the ' Essays' of 1765 and 1766. The date
in the Public Ledger is July 23, 1760.—ED.
2-2 In lieu of this the ' Essays' version has—" and must take leave to
throw together a few observations upon that part of a young man's con-
duct on his entering into life, as it is called."—ED.
<pb>
the useful part of every profession, very moderate abilities
will suffice; ' even if the mind be a little balanced with
stupidity, it may in this case be useful.1 Great abilities
have always been less serviceable to the possessors than
moderate ones.2 Life has been compared to a race, but the
allusion still improves by observing, that the most swift
are ever the least manageable.3
To know one profession only, is enough for one man to
know ; and this (whatever the professors may tell you to
the contrary) is soon learned. Be contented, therefore,
with one good employment; for if you understand two at
a time, people will give you business in neither.
A conjuror and a tailor once happened to converse toge-
ther. " Alas ! " cried the tailor, " what an unhappy poor
creature am I; if people should ever take it in their heads
to live without clothes, I am undone; I have no other
trade to have recourse to."—" Indeed, friend, I pity you
sincerely," replies the conjuror; " but, thank Heaven,
things are not quite so bad with me; for if one trick
should fail, I have a hundred tricks more for them yet.
However, if at any time you are reduced to beggary, apply
to me, and I will relieve you." A famine overspread the
land ; the tailor made a shift to live, because his cus-
tomers could not be without clothes; but the poor con-
juror, with all his hundred tricks, could find none that had
money to throw away ; it was in vain that he promised to
eat fire, or to vomit pins ; no single creature would relieve
him, till he was at last obliged to beg from the very tailor
whose calling he had formerly despised.
There are no obstructions more fatal to fortune than
pride and resentment. If you must resent injuries at all,
at least suppress your indignation until you become rich,
and then show away : the resentment of a poor man is like
the efforts of a harmless insect to sting; it may get him
crushed, but cannot defend him. Who values that anger
which is consumed only in empty menaces ?
'-' This was not admitted into the ' Essays' version.—ED.
2 " Great abilities are generally obnoxious to the possessors," is the
' Essays' reading.—ED.
3 The ' Essays' version reads—" are ever the most apt to stray from
the course."—ED.
<pb>
231
Once upon a time, a goose fed its young by a pond side;
and a goose, in such circumstances, is always extremely
proud, and excessively punctilious. If any other animal,
without the least design to offend, happened to pass that
way, the goose was immediately at him. The pond, she
said, was hers, and she would maintain a right in it, and
support her honour, while she had a bill to hiss, or a wing
to flutter. In this manner she drove away ducks, pigs,
and chickens; nay, even the insidious cat was seen to
scamper. A lounging mastiff, however, happened to pass
by, and thought it no harm if he should lap a little of the
water, as he was thirsty. The guardian goose flew at him
like a fury, pecked at him with her beak, and slapped him
with her feathers. The dog grew angry, had twenty times
a good mind to give her a sly snap; but suppressing his
indignation, because his master was nigh, " A pox take
thee," cries he, " for a fool ! sure those who have neither
strength nor weapons to fight, at least should be civil;
1 that fluttering and hissing of thine may one day get thine
head snapt off, but it can neither injure thy enemies,
nor ever protect thee." ' So saying, he went forward to the
pond, quenched his thirst in spite of the goose, and fol-
lowed his master.
Another obstruction to the fortune of youth is, that
while they are willing to take offence from none, they are
also equally desirous of giving none offence. From hence
they endeavour to please all, comply with every request,
attempt to suit themselves to every company, have no will
of their own, but, like wax, catch every contiguous im-
pression. By thus attempting to give universal satisfac-
tion, they at last find themselves miserably disappointed :
to bring the generality of admirers on our side, it is suffi-
cient to attempt pleasing a very few.
A painter of eminence was once resolved to finish a
piece which should please the whole world. When, there-
fore, he had drawn a picture, in which his utmost skill
was exhausted, it was exposed in the public market-place,
with directions at the bottom for every spectator to mark
with a brush, which lay by, every limb and feature which
'-' Omitted from the 'Essays' version.—ED.
<pb>
seemed erroneous. The spectators came, and in general
applauded; but each, willing to show his talent at criti-
cism, marked whatever he thought proper. At evening,
when the painter came, he was mortified to find the whole
picture one universal blot—not a single stroke that was
not stigmatized with marks of disapprobation : not satis-
fied with this trial, the next day he was resolved to try
them in a different manner, and, exposing his picture as
before, desired that every spectator would mark those
beauties he approved or admired. The people complied :
and the artist returning, found his picture replete with
the marks of beauty: every stroke that had been yester-
day condemned, now received the character of approba-
tion. " Well," cries the painter, " I now find that the
best way to please one half of the world, is not to mind
what the other half says ; since what are faults in the
eyes of these, shall be by those regarded as beauties." l
Adieu.
LETTER LXII.
From Lien Chi Altangi to Hingpo.
AN AUTHENTIC HISTORY OF CATHARINA ALEXOWNA, WIFE
OF PETER THE GREAT.2
A CHARACTER, such as you have represented that of
your fair companion, which continues virtuous, though
loaded with infamy, is truly great. Many regard virtue
because it is attended with applause ; your favourite only
for the internal pleasure it confers. I have often wished
that ladies like her were proposed as models for female
imitation, and not such as have acquired fame by qualities
repugnant to the natural softness of the sex.
Women famed for their valour, their skill in politics, or
their learning, leave the duties of their own sex, in order
to invade the privileges of ours. I can no more pardon a
1 The concluding words in the 'Essays' version are—'" Well,'cries
the painter,' I now find that the best way to please all the world, is
to attempt pleasing one half of it.'"—ED.
" Date in the Public Ledger, July 28, 1760.—ED.
<pb>
fair one for endeavouring to wield the club of Hercules,
than I could him for attempting to twirl her distaff.
The modest virgin, the prudent wife, or the careful
matron, are much more serviceable in life than petticoated
philosophers, blustering heroines, or virago queens. She
who makes her husband and her children happy, who re-
claims the one from vice, and trains up the others to
virtue, is a much greater character than ladies described
in romance, whose whole occupation is to murder mankind
with shafts from their quiver or their eyes.
Women, it has been observed, are not naturally formed
for great cares themselves, but to soften ours. Their ten-
derness is the proper reward for the dangers we undergo
for their preservation; and the ease and cheerfulness of
their conversation, our desirable retreat from the fatigues
of intense application. They are confined within the
narrow limits of domestic assiduity ; and, when they stray
beyond them, they move beyond their sphere, and, conse-
quently, without grace.
Fame, therefore, has been very unjustly dispensed
among the female sex. Those who least deserved to be
remembered, meet our admiration and applause; while
many who have been an honour to humanity are passed
over in silence. Perhaps no age has produced a stronger
instance of misplaced fame than the present: the Semi-
ramis and the Thalestris of antiquity are talked of, while
a modern character, infinitely greater than either, is un-
noticed and unknown.
Catherina Alexowna,1 born near Derpat, a little city in
' This account seems to be taken from the manuscript memoirs of
H. Spilman, Esq.—GOLDSMITH. [This note was not given with the
Public Ledger version. The above story is somewhat more romantic
than Catharina's real history—and also somewhat more nattering to the
lady—though, as Voltaire has remarked—" There have been instances,
before this, of private persons being raised to the throne; but that a
poor stranger, who had been discovered amidst the ruins of a plundered
town, should become the absolute sovereign of that very empire into
which she was led captive, is an incident which fortune and merit have
never before produced in the annals of the world." Goldsmith, how-
ever, seems to have put forward " H. Spilman, Esq.," to be responsible
for the exaggerations. The Empress Catharine I., who reigned over
Kussia for two years after the death of her husband, Peter the Great,
died in 1727.—ED.]
<pb>
Livonia, was heir to no other inheritance than the virtues
and frugality of her parents. Her father being dead, she
lived with her aged mother in their cottage covered with
straw; and both, though very poor, were very contented.
Here, retired from the gaze of the world, by the labour of
her hands she supported her parent, who was now inca-
pable of supporting herself. While Catharina spun, the
old woman would sit by and read some book of devotion ;
thus, when the fatigues of the day were over, both would
sit down contentedly by their fireside, and enjoy the
frugal meal with vacant festivity.
Though her face and person were models of perfection,
yet her whole attention seemed bestowed upon her mind ;
her mother taught her to read, and an old Lutheran
minister instructed her in the maxims and duties of re-
ligion. Nature had furnished her, not only with a ready,
but a solid turn of thought, not only with a strong, but a
right understanding. Such truly female accomplishments
procured her several solicitations of marriage from the
peasants of the country; but their offers were refused;
for she loved her mother too tenderly to think of a sepa-
ration.
Catharina was fifteen when her mother died; she now
therefore left her cottage, and went to live with the
Lutheran minister, by whom she had been instructed
from her childhood. In his house she resided in quality
of governess to his children, at once reconciling in her
character unerring prudence with surprising vivacity.
The old man, who regarded her as one of his own
children, had her instructed in dancing and music by the
masters who attended the rest of his family; thus she
continued to improve till he died, by which accident she
was once more reduced to pristine poverty. The country
of Livonia was at this time wasted by war, and lay in a
most miserable state of desolation. Those calamities are
ever most heavy upon the poor; wherefore Catharina,
though possessed of so many accomplishments, expe-
rienced all the miseries of hopeless indigence. Provisions
becoming every day more scarce, and her private stock
being entirely exhausted, she resolved at last to travel to
Marienburgh, a city of greater plenty.
<pb>
With her scanty wardrobe packed up in a wallet, she set
out on her journey on foot: she was to walk through a.
region miserable by nature, but rendered still more
hideous by the Swedes and Russians, who, as each hap-
pened to become masters, plundered it at discretion; l but
hunger had taught her to despise the dangers and fatigues-
of the way.1
One evening upon her journey, as she had entered a
cottage by the way-side, to take up her lodgings for the
night, she was insulted by two Swedish soldiers, who in-
sisted upon qualifying her, as they termed it, " to follow
the camp." They might probably have carried their in-
sults into violence, had not a subaltern officer, accidentally
passing by, come in to her assistance : upon his appear-
ing, the soldiers immediately desisted ; but her thankful-
ness was hardly greater than her surprise, when sh&
instantly recollected in her deliverer, the son of the
Lutheran minister, her former instructor, benefactor, and
friend.
This was a happy interview for Catharina: the little
stock of money she had brought from home was by this
time quite exhausted; her clothes were gone, piece by
piece, in order to satisfy those who had entertained her in
their houses : her generous countryman, therefore, parted
with what he could spare, to buy her clothes, furnished
her with a horse, and gave her letters of recommendation
to Mr. Gluck, a faithful friend of his father's, and super-
intendent at Marienburgh.
Our beautiful stranger had only to appear to be well
received ; she was immediately admitted into the superin-
tendent's family, as governess to his two daughters; and
though yet but seventeen, showed herself capable of in-
structing her sex, not only in virtue, but politeness. Such
was her good sense and beauty, that her master himself in
a short time offered her his hand, which, to his great sur-
prise, she thought proper to refuse. Actuated by a prin-
ciple of gratitude, she was resolved to marry her deliverer
only, even though he had lost an arm, and was otherwise-
disfigured by wounds in the service.
'-' Not in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
In order, therefore, to prevent further solicitations from
others, as soon as the officer came to town upon duty, she
offered him her person, which he accepted with transport,
and their nuptials were solemnized as usual. But all the
lines of her fortune were to be striking: the very day on
which they were married, the Russians laid siege to
Marienburgh. The unhappy soldier had now no time to
enjoy the well earned pleasures of matrimony ; he was
called off, before consummation, to an attack, from which
he was never after seen to return.
In the meantime the siege went on with fury, aggra-
vated on one side by obstinacy, on the other by revenge.
This war between the two northern powers at that time
was truly barbarous; the innocent peasant, and the
harmless virgin, often shared the fate of the soldier in
arms. Marienburgh was taken by assault; and such was
the fury of the assailants, that not only the garrison, but
almost all the inhabitants, men, women, and children,
were put to the sword; at length, when the carnage was
pretty well over, Catharina was found hid in an oven.
She had been hitherto poor, but still was free; she was
now to conform to her hard fate, and learn what it was to
be a slave: in this situation, however, she behaved with
piety and humility ; and though misfortunes had abated
her vivacity, yet she was pheerful. The fame of her merit
and resignation reached even Prince Menzikoff, the Rus-
sian general; he desired to see her, was struck with her
beauty, bought her from the soldier her master, and
placed her under the direction of his own sister. Here
she was treated with all the respect which her merit
deserved, while her beauty every day improved with her
good fortune.
She had not been long in this situation, when Peter the
Great, paying the Prince a visit, Catharina happened to
come in with some dry fruits, which she served round with
peculiar modesty. The mighty monarch saw, and was struck
with her beauty. He returned the next day, called for the
beautiful slave, asked her several questions, and found her
understanding even more perfect than her person.
He had been forced, when young, to marry from motives
.of interest; he was now resolved to marry pursuant to his
<pb>
237
own inclinations. He immediately enquired the history of
the fair Livonian, who was not yet eighteen. He traced
her through the vale of obscurity, through all the vicissi-
tudes of her fortune, and found her truly great in them all.
The meanness of her birth was no obstruction to his de-
sign : their nuptials were solemnized in private; the Prince
assuring his courtiers, that virtue alone was the properest
ladder to a throne.
We now see Catharina, from the low mud-walled cot-
tage, Empress of the greatest kingdom upon earth. The
poor solitary wanderer is now surrounded by thousands,
who find happiness in her smile. She, who formerly wanted
a meal, is now capable of diffusing plenty upon whole
nations. To her fortune she owed a part of this pre-
eminence, but to her virtues more.
She ever after retained those great qualities which first
placed her on a throne ; and, while the extraordinary
prince, her husband, laboured for the reformation of his
male subjects, she studied in her turn the improvement of
her own sex. She altered their dresses, introduced mixed
assemblies,1 instituted an order of female knighthood; and
at length, when she had greatly filled all the stations of
Empress, friend, wife and mother, bravely died without
regret, regretted by all. Adieu.
LETTEE LXIIL
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President, &c.
THE BISB OR THE DECLINE OF LITERATURE NOT DEPEN-
DENT ON MAN, BUT RESULTING FROM THE VICISSI-
TUDES OF NATURE.2
IN every letter I expect accounts of some new revolutions
in China, some strange occurrence in the state, or disaster
among my private acquaintance. I open every packet with
1 See " Rules Enjoined to be Observed at a Russian Assembly," in
the ' Essays,' vol. i., p. 299.—ED.
2 Dated Aug. 13, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
tremulous expectation, and am agreeably disappointed
when I find my friends and my country continuing in feli-
city. I wander, but they are at rest; they suffer few
changes but what pass in my own restless imagination: it
is only the rapidity of my own motion gives an imaginary
swiftness to objects which are in some measure immove-
able.1
Yet believe me, my friend, that even China itself is im-
perceptibly degenerating from her ancient greatness: her
laws are now more venal, and her merchants are more de-
ceitful than formerly; the very arts and sciences have run
to decay. Observe the carvings on our ancient bridges,
figures that add grace even to nature: there is not an
artist now in all the empire that can imitate their beauty.
Our manufacturers in porcelain, too, are inferior to what
we once were famous for; and even Europe now begins to
excel us. There was a time when China was the receptacle
of strangers; when all were welcome who either came to
improve the state, or admire its greatness; now the empire
is shut up from every foreign improvement, and the very
inhabitants discourage each other from prosecuting their
own internal advantages.
Whence this degeneracy in a state so little subject to
external revolutions? how happens it that China, which is
now more powerful than ever, which is less subject to
foreign invasions, and even assisted in some discoveries
by her connections with Europe; whence comes it, I say,
that the empire is thus declining so fast into barbarity ?
This decay is surely from nature, and not the result of
voluntary degeneracy. In a period of two or three thousand
years she seems at proper intervals to produce great minds,
with an effort resembling that which introduces the vicissi-
tudes of seasons. They rise up at once, continue for an
age, enlighten the world, fall like ripened corn, and man-
kind again gradually relapse into pristine barbarity. We
1 In his letter to his brother-in-law Hodson, Dec. 27,1757, Goldsmith
(the then " discontented wanderer" but newly arrived in London) says
—" Before Charles came hither, my thoughts sometimes found refuge
from severer studies among my friends in Ireland. I fancied strange
revolutions at home; but I find it was the rapidity of my own motion
that gave an imaginary one to objects really at rest." See Goldsmith's
Letters in our vol. i., p. 432.—ED.
<pb>
little ones look around, are amazed at the decline, seek
after the causes of this invisible decay, attribute to want
of encouragement what really proceeds from want of
power, are astonished to find every art and every science
in the decline, not considering that autumn is over, and
fatigued nature again begins to repose for some succeeding
effort.
Some periods have been remarkable for the production
of men of extraordinary stature; others for producing some
particular animals in great abundance; some for excessive
plenty ; and others again for seemingly causeless famine.
Nature, which shows herself so very different in her visible
productions, must surely differ also from herself in the
production of minds; and while she astonishes one age
with the strength and stature of a Milo or a Maximin, may
bless another with the wisdom of a Plato, or the goodness
of an Antonine.
Let us not, then, attribute to accident the falling off of
every nation, but to the natural revolution of things.
Often in the darkest ages there has appeared some one
man of surprising abilities, who, with all his understand-
ing, failed to bring his barbarous age into refinement: all
mankind seemed to sleep, till nature gave the general call,
and then the whole world seemed at once roused at the
voice ; science triumphed in every country, and the bright-
ness of a single genius seemed lost in a galaxy of contiguous
glory.
Thus the enlightened periods in every age have been
universal. At the time when China first began to emerge
from barbarity, the Western world was equally rising into
refinement; when we had our Yau,1 they had their Sesos-
tris. In succeeding ages, Confucius and Pythagoras seem
born nearly together, and a train of philosophers then
sprung up as well in Greece as in China. The period of
renewed barbarity began to have a universal spread much
about the same time, and continued for several centuries,
till, in the year of the Christian era, 1400, the Emperor
1 Yaou, one of the " five sovereigns " of the earliest Chinese history.
He is supposed to have reigned about 2,000 years B.C., and is credited
with, amongst other things, having introduced the intercalation of the
lunar year. See Da vis's ' Chinese/ 1836, vol. i., p. 160.—ED.
<pb>
Tonglo arose to revive the learning of the East; while
about the same time, the Medicean family laboured in
Italy to raise infant genius from the cradle. Thus we see
politeness spreading over every part of the world in one
age, and barbarity succeeding in another; at one period
a blaze of light diffusing itself over the whole world, and
at another all mankind wrapped up in the profoundest
ignorance.
Such has been the situation of things in times past, and
such, probably, it will ever be. China, I have observed,
has evidently begun to degenerate from its former polite-
ness ; and were the learning of the Europeans at present
candidly considered, the decline would perhaps appear to
have already taken place. We should find among the
natives of the West, the study of morality displaced for
mathematical disquisition, or metaphysical subtleties; we
should find learning begin to separate from the useful
duties and concerns of life, while none ventured to aspire
after that character, but they who know much more than
is truly amusing or useful. We should find every great
attempt suppressed by prudence, and the rapturous sub-
limity in writing cooled by a cautious fear of offence. We
should find few of those daring spirits, who bravely ven-
tured to be wrong, and who are willing to hazard much
for the sake of great acquisitions. Providence has indulged
the world with a period of almost four hundred years' re-
finement ; does it not now by degrees sink us into our
former ignorance, leaving us only the love of wisdom,
while it deprives us of its advantages ? Adieu.
LETTEE LXIV.
To the Same.
THE GBEAT EXCHANGE HAPPINESS FOR SHOW. THEIR
FOLLY IK THIS BESPECT OF USE TO SOCIETY.1
THE princes of Europe have found out a manner of re-
warding their subjects who have behaved well, by presenting
1 Dated Aug. 6, 17BO, in the Pu'ilic Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
241
them with about two yards of blue ribbon, which is worn
about the shoulder. They who are honoured with this mark
of distinction are called knights, and the king himself is
always the head of the order. This is .a very frugal
method of recompensing the most important services ; and
it is very fortunate for kings that their subjects are satis-
fied with such trifling rewards. Should a nobleman
happen to lose his leg in battle, the king presents him
with two yards of ribbon, and he is paid for the loss of his
limb. Should an ambassador spend all his paternal for-
tune in supporting the honour of his country abroad, the
king presents him with two yards of ribbon, which is to
be considered as an equivalent to his estate. In short,
while an European king has a yard of blue or green riband
left,1 he need be under no apprehensions of wanting states-
men, generals, and soldiers.
I cannot sufficiently admire those kingdoms in which
men with large patrimonial estates are willing thus to
undergo real hardships for empty favours. A person,
already possessed of a competent fortune, who undertakes
to enter the career of ambition, feels many real inconve-
niences from his station, while it procures him no real
happiness that he was not possessed of before. He could
eat, drink, and sleep, before he became a courtier, as well,
perhaps better, than when invested with his authority.
He could command flatterers in a private station, as well
as in his public capacity, and indulge at home every
favourite inclination, uncensured and unseen by the
people.
What real good, then, does an addition to a fortune
already sufficient procure ? Not any. Could the great
man, by having his fortune increased, increase also his
appetites, then precedence might be attended with real
amusement.
Was he, by having his one thousand made two, thus
enabled to enjoy two wives, or eat two dinners, then, in-
deed, he might be excused for undergoing some pain, in
order to extend the sphere of his enjoyments. But, on
the contrary, he finds his desire for pleasure often lessen,
1 The blue riband is worn by the Knights of the Garter, and the
green by those of the Thistle.—B.
"
III. R
<pb>
as he takes pains to be able to improve it; and his capa-
city of enjoyment diminishes as his fortune happens to
increase.
Instead, therefore, of regarding the great with envy, I
generally consider them with some share of compassion.
I look upon them as a set of good-natured, misguided
people, who are indebted to us, and not to themselves,
for all the happiness they enjoy. For our pleasure, and
not their own, they sweat under a cumbrous heap of finery;
for our pleasure, the lackeyed train, the slow parading
pageant, with all the gravity of grandeur, moves in re-
view : a single coat, or a single footman, answers all the
purposes of the most indolent refinement as well; and
those who have twenty, may be said to keep one for their
own pleasure, and the other nineteen merely for ours. So
true is the observation of Confucius," That we take greater
pains to persuade others that we are happy, than in
endeavouring to think so ourselves."
But though this desire of being seen, of being made
the subject of discourse, and of supporting the dignities
of an exalted station, be troublesome enough to the ambi-
tious, yet it is well for society that there are men thus
willing to exchange ease and safety for danger and a
ribbon. We lose nothing by their vanity, and it would
be unkind to endeavour to deprive a child of its rattle.
If a duke or a duchess are willing to carry a long
train for our entertainment, so much the worse for them-
selves ; if they choose to exhibit in public, with a
hundred lackeys and mamelukes in their equipage, for
our entertainment, still so much the worse for themselves ;
it is the spectators alone who give and receive the plea-
sure ; they only [are] the sweating figures that swell the
pageant.
A mandarine, who took much pride in appearing with a
number of jewels on every part of his robe, was once
accosted by an old sly bonze, who, following him through
several streets, and bowing often to the ground, thanked
him for his jewels. " What does the man mean ? " cried
the mandarine: " Friend, I never gave thee any of my
jewels."—"No," replied the other; "but you have let
me look at them, and that is all the use you can make of
<pb>
them yourself; so there is no difference between us, ex-
cept that you have the trouble of watching them, and that
is an employment I don't much desire." Adieu.
LETTEE LXV.
To the Same.
THOUGH not very fond of seeing a pageant myself, yet
I am generally pleased with being in the crowd which sees
it: it is amusing to observe the effect which such a spec-
tacle has upon the variety of faces; the pleasure it excites
in some, the envy in others, and the wishes it raises in
all. With this design I lately went to see the entry of a
foreign ambassador, resolved to make one in the mob, to
shout as they shouted, to fix with earnestness upon the
same frivolous objects, and participate for a while the
pleasures and the wishes of the vulgar.2
Struggling here for some time, in order to be first to
see the cavalcade as it passed, some one of the crowd un-
luckily happened to tread upon my shoe, and tore it in
such a manner, that I was utterly unqualified to march
forward with the main body, and obliged to fall back in
the rear. Thus rendered incapable of being a spectator
of the show myself, I was at least willing to observe the
spectators, and limped behind like one of the invalids
which follow the march of an army.
In this plight, as I was considering the eagerness that
appeared on every face, how some bustled to get foremost,
and others contented themselves with taking a transient
peep when they could; how some praised the four black
servants that were stuck behind one of the equipages, and
some the ribbons that decorated the horses' necks in
another, my attention was called off to an object more
extraordinary than any I had yet seen: a poor cobbler sat
1 Dated Aug. 12, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
2 Compare the opening paragraph of Letter LI V.—ED.
<pb>
in his stall by the way-side, and continued to work, while
the crowd passed by, without testifying the smallest share
of curiosity. I own his want of attention excited mine ;
and as I stood in need of his assistance, I thought it
best to employ a philosophic cobbler on this occasion.
Perceiving my business, therefore, he desired me to enter
and sit down, took m'y shoe in his lap, and began to mend
it with his usual indifference and taciturnity.
" How, my friend," said I to him, " can you continue
to work, while all those fine things are passing by your
door ? " " Very fine they are, master," returned the
cobbler, " for those that like them, to be sure; but what
are all those fine things to me ? You don't know what it
is to be a cobbler, and so much the better for yourself.
Your bread is baked: you may go and see sights the
whole day, and eat a warm supper when you come home
at night; but for me, if I should run hunting after all
these fine folk, what should I get by my journey but an
appetite, and, God help me ! I have too much of that
at home already, without stirring out for it. Your
people who may eat four meals a-day, and a supper at
night, are but a bad example to such a one as I. No,
master, as God has called me into this world in order to
mend old shoes, I have no business with fine folk, and
they no business with me." I here interrupted him with
a smile. " See this last, master," continues he, " and this
hammer; this last and hammer are the two best friends
I have in this world ; nobody else will be my friend, be-
cause I want a friend. The great folks you saw pass by
just now have five hundred friends, because they have no
occasion for them: now, while I stick to my good friends
here, I am very contented; but when I ever so little run
after sights and fine things, I begin to hate my work; I
grow sad, and have no heart to mend shoes any longer."
This discourse only served to raise my curiosity to know
more of a man whom nature had thus formed into a
philosopher. I therefore insensibly led him into a history
of his adventures : " I have lived," said he, " a wandering
sort of a life now five-and-fifty years, here to-day, and
gone to-morrow; for it was my misfortune, when I was
young, to be fond of changing."—" You have been a tra-
<pb>
veller, then, I presume," interrupted I. " I cannot boast
much of travelling," continued he, " for I have never left
the parish in which I was born but three times in my life,
that I can remember; but then there is not a street in
the whole neighbourhood that I have not lived in, at some
time or another. When I began to settle and to take to
my business in one street, some unforeseen misfortune, or
a desire of trying my luck elsewhere, has removed me,
perhaps a whole mile away from my former customers,
while some more lucky cobbler would come into my place,
and make a handsome fortune among friends of my
making: there was one who actually died in a stall that I
had left, worth seven pounds seven shillings, all in hard
gold, which he had quilted into the waistband of his
breeches."
I could not but smile at these migrations of a man by
the fireside,1 and continued to ask if he had ever been
married. " Ay, that I have, master," replied he, " for six-
teen long years; and a weary life I had of it, Heaven
knows. My wife took it into her head, that the only way
to thrive in this world was to save money; so, though our
comings-in were but about three shillings a-week, all that
ever she could lay her hands upon she used to hide away
from me, though we were obliged to starve the whole
week after for it.
" The first three years we used to quarrel about this
every day, and I always got the better; but she had a
hard spirit, and still continued to hide as usual: so that
I was at last tired of quarrelling and getting the better, and
she scrapedand scraped at pleasure, till I was almost starved
to death. Her conduct drove me at last in despair to the
alehouse ; here I used to sit with people who hated home
like myself, drank while I had money left, and ran in score
when any body would trust me; till at last the landlady
coming one day with a long bill when I was from home,
and putting it into my wife's hands, the length of it
effectually broke her heart. I searched the whole stall,
after she was dead, for money, but she had hidden it so
1 For " migrations," &c., see passages in the ' Vicar of Wakefield'
<Chap. I.), and Goldsmith's Letters (vol. i., pp. 432, 436), and else-
where.—ED.
<pb>
effectually, that, with all my pains, I could never find a
farthing."
By this time my shoe was mended, and satisfying the
poor artist for his trouble, and rewarding him besides for
his information, I took my leave, and returned home to
lengthen out the amusement his conversation afforded, by
communicating it to my friend. Adieu.1
LETTER LXVI.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Hingpo, by the way of Moscow.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN LOVE AND GRATITUDE
CIUS AND THE HERMIT. THE STORY OF THE FIDDLE-
CASE] . 2
GENEROSITY, properly applied, will supply every other
external advantage in life, but the love of those we con-
verse with ; 3 it will procure esteem, and a conduct resem-
bling real affection ; but actual love is the spontaneous
production of the mind ; no generosity can purchase, no
rewards increase, nor no liberality continue it : the very
person who is obliged, has it not in his power to force his
lingering affections upon the object he should love, and
voluntarily mix passion with gratitude.
Imparted fortune, and well-placed liberality, may pro-
cure the benefactor good- will, may load the person obliged
with the sense of the duty he lies under to retaliate ; this
is gratitude ; and simple gratitude, untinctured with love,
is all the return an ingenuous mind can bestow for former
benefits.
But gratitude and love are almost opposite affections ;
love is often an involuntary passion, placed upon our com-
1 Here ends the first volume in the original editions of the ' Citizen of
the World.'— ED.
1 Dated Aug. 19, 1760, in the Public Ledger.— ED.
3 The Ledger version opens — " A proper application of benefits, my
son, will supply," &c. Otherwise the letter as it now appears has been
a good deal re-written, though not altered in substance. — Ki>.
<pb>
panions without our consent, and frequently conferred
without our previous esteem. We love some men, we
know not why; our tenderness is naturally excited in all
their concerns ; we excuse their faults with the same in-
dulgence, and approve their virtues with the same applause
with which we consider our own. While we entertain the
passion, it pleases us; we cherish it with delight, and give
it up with reluctance; and love for love is all the- reward
we expect or desire.
Gratitude, on the contrary, is never conferred, but where
there have been previous endeavours to excite it; we con-
sider it as a debt, and our spirits wear a load till we have
discharged the obligation. Every acknowledgment of
gratitude is a circumstance of humiliation; and some are
found to submit to frequent mortifications of this kind,
proclaiming what obligations they owe, merely because
they think it in some measure cancels the debt.
Thus love is the most easy and agreeable, and gratitude
the most humiliating affection of the mind: we never re-
flect on the man we love, without exulting in our choice,
while he who has bound us to him by benefits alone, rises
to our idea as a person to whom we have in some measure
forfeited our freedom. Love and gratitude are seldom,
therefore, found in the same breast without impairing each
other; we may tender the one or the other singly to those
we converse with, but cannot command both together.
By attempting to increase, we diminish them ; the mind
becomes bankrupt under too large obligations; all addi-
tional benefits lessen every hope of future return, and bar
Tip every avenue that leads to tenderness.
In all our connections with society, therefore, it is not
only generous, but prudent, to appear insensible of the
value of those favours we bestow, and endeavour to make
the obligation seem as slight as possible. Love must be
taken by stratagem, and not by open force: we should
seem ignorant that we oblige, and leave the mind at full
liberty to give or refuse its affections; for constraint may
indeed leave the receiver still grateful, but it will certainly
produce disgust.
If to procure gratitude be our only aim, there is no great
art in making the acquisition; a benefit conferred demands
'
<pb>
a just acknowledgment, and we have a right to insist upon
our due.
But it were much more prudent to forego our right on
such an occasion, and exchange it, if we can, for love. We
receive but little advantage from repeated protestations of
gratitude, but they cost him very much from whom we
exact them in return: exacting a grateful acknowledgment
is demanding a debt by which the creditor is not advan-
taged, and the debtor pays with reluctance.
As Mencius, the philosopher, was travelling in pursuit
of wisdom, night overtook him at the foot of a gloomy
mountain, remote from the habitations of men. Here, as
he was straying, while rain and thunder conspired to make
solitude still more hideous, he perceived a hermit's cell,
and, approaching, asked for shelter: " Enter," cries the
hermit, in a severe tone; " men deserve not to be obliged,
but it would be imitating their ingratitude to treat them
as they deserve. Come in: examples of vice may some-
times strengthen us in the ways of virtue."
After a frugal meal, which consisted of roots and tea,
Mencius could not repress his curiosity to know why the
hermit had retired from mankind, the actions of whom
taught the truest lessons of wisdom. " Mention not the
name of man," cries the hermit, with indignation ; " here
let me live retired from a base ungrateful world; here
among the beasts of the forest I shall find no flatterers :
the lion is a generous enemy, and the dog a faithful friend;
but man, base man, can poison the bowl, and smile while
he presents it! "—" You have been used ill by mankind ?"
interrupted the philosopher shrewdly. " Yes," returned
the hermit, " on mankind I have exhausted my whole for-
tune, and this staff, and that cup, and those roots, are all
that I have in return."—" Did you bestow your fortune, or
did you only lend it ? " returned Mencius.—" I bestowed
it, undoubtedly," replied the other, " for where were the
merit of being a money-lender ? "—" Did they ever own
that they received it ? " still adds the philosopher.—" A
thousand times," cries the hermit; " they every day loaded
me with professions of gratitude for obligations received,
and solicitations for future favours."—" If, then," says
Mencius, smiling, " you did not lend your fortune in order
<pb>
to have it returned, it is unjust to accuse them of ingrati-
tude ; they owned themselves obliged, you expected no
more, and they certainly earned each favour by frequently
acknowledging the obligation." The hermit was struck
with the reply, and surveying his guest with emotion,—
" I have heard of the great Mencius, and you certainly are
the man: I am now fourscore years old, but still a child
in wisdom; take me back to the school of man, and educate
me as one of the most ignorant and the youngest of your
disciples!"
Indeed, my son, it is better to have friends in our pas-
sage through life than grateful dependants,1 and as love is
a more willing, so it is a more lasting tribute than extorted
obligation. As we are uneasy when greatly obliged, grati-
tude once refused can never after be recovered: the mind
that is base enough to disallow the just return, instead of
feeling any uneasiness upon recollection, triumphs in its
new acquired freedom, and, in some measure, is pleased
with conscious baseness.
Very different is the situation of disagreeing friends:
their separation produces mutual uneasiness; like that
divided being in fabulous creation, their sympathetic souls
once more desire their former union; the joys of both are
imperfect; their gayest moments tinctured with uneasi-
ness ; each seeks for the smallest concessions to clear the
way to a wished-f or explanation; the most trifling acknow-
ledgment, the slightest accident, serves to effect a mutual
reconciliation.
But instead of pursuing the thought, permit me to soften
the severity of advice, by a European story which will fully
illustrate my meaning.
A fiddler and his wife, who had rubbed through life, as
most couples usually do, sometimes good friends, at others
not quite so well, one day happened to have a dispute,
which was conducted with becoming spirit on both sides.
The wife was sure she was right, and the husband was
resolved to have his own way. What was to be done in
such a case ? the quarrel grew worse by explanations, and
at last the fury of both rose to such a pitch, that they
1 For " grateful dependants" the Public Ledger has " admirers."—
ED.
<pb>
made a vow never to sleep together in the same bed for
the future. This was the most rash vow that could be
imagined, for they were still friends at bottom, and be-
sides, they had but one bed in the house: however, resolved
they were to go through with it, and at night the fiddle-
case was laid in the bed between them, in order to make a
separation. In this manner they continued for three weeks;
every night the fiddle-case being placed as a barrier to
divide them.
By this time, however, each heartily repented of their
vow, their resentment was at an end, and their love began
to return; they wished the fiddle-case away, but both had
too much spirit to begin. One night, however, as they
were both lying awake with the detested fiddle-case between
them, the husband happened to sneeze, to which the wife,
as is usual in such cases, bid God bless him.1 "Ay, but,"
returns the husband, " woman, do you say that from your
heart ? "—" Indeed I do, my poor Nicholas," cries his
wife; " I say it with all my heart."—" If so, then," says
the husband, " we had as good remove the fiddle-case."
LETTER LXVII.
To the Same.
THE FOLLY OF ATTEMPTING TO LEARN WISDOM BY BEINO
RECLUSE.2
BOOKS, my son, while they teach us to respect the inte-
rests of others, often make us unmindful of our own; while
they instruct the youthful reader to grasp at social happi-
ness, he grows miserable in detail, and, attentive to
1 In allusion to an ancient and still prevailing usage. The Greeks
thought sneezing as of good omen in the crisis of an attack of the plague.
With them " The gods bless you! " addressed to one sneezing was equi-
valent to—" May the gods so bless you as that portends!" (Xenophon,
±op., Aristotle, &e.) Later the same idea seems to have been some-
-t differently applied to the so-called plague of sneezing of the year
558, when, we are told, persons apparently in good health were suddenly
attacked with fits of sneezing which proved fatal.—ED.
2 Dated Aug. 22, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—En.
<pb>
251
universal harmony, often forgets that he himself has a
part to sustain in the concert. I dislike, therefore, the
philosopher, who describes the inconveniences of life in
such pleasing colours that the pupil grows enamoured of
distress, longs to try the charms of poverty, meets it with-
out dread, nor fears its inconveniences till he severely feels
them.
A youth who has thus spent his life among books, new
to the world, and unacquainted with man but by philo-
sophic information, may be considered as a being whose
mind is filled with the vulgar errors of the wise; utterly
unqualified for a journey through life, yet confident of his
own skill in the direction, he sets out with confidence,
blunders on with vanity, and finds himself at last undone.1
He first2 has learned from books, and then2 lays it down
as a maxim, that all mankind are virtuous or vicious in
excess; and he has been long taught to detest vice, and
love virtue: warm, therefore in attachments, and steadfast
in enmity, he treats every creature as a friend or foe ; ex-
pects from those he loves unerring integrity, and consigns
his enemies to the reproach of wanting every virtue. On
this principle he proceeds ; and here begin his disappoint-
ments. Upon a closer inspection of human nature he
perceives, that he should have moderated his friendship,
and softened his severity; for he often finds the excellen-
cies of one part of mankind clouded with vice, and the
faults of the other brightened with virtue; he finds no
character so sanctified that has not its failings, none so in-
famous but has somewhat to attract our esteem; he beholds
impiety in lawn, and fidelity in fetters.
He now, therefore, but too late, perceives that his re-
gards should have been more cool, and his hatred less
violent; that the truly wise seldom court romantic friend-
ships with the good, and avoid, if possible, the resentment
even of the wicked: every moment gives him fresh in-
stances that the bonds of friendship are broken if drawn
1 Much of the matter of this essay is evidently suggested by the
author's own experiences in life, as will be seen by reference to his letter
to his brother Henry, dated about 1759 (see Letters, vol. i., p. 449), and
other passages in his works.—ED.
2-2 Not in the Ledger version.—ED.
<pb>
too closely, and that those whom he has treated with dis-
respect more than retaliate the injury; at length, there-
fore, he is obliged to confess, that he has declared war
upon the vicious half of mankind, without being able to
form an alliance among the virtuous to espouse his quarrel.
Our book-taught philosopher, however, is now too far
advanced to recede; and though poverty be the just con-
sequence of the many enemies his conduct has created, yet
he is resolved to meet it without shrinking. Philosophers
have described poverty in most charming colours, and even
his vanity is touched in thinking, that he shall show the
world, in himself, one more example of patience, fortitude,
and resignation. " Come, then, O Poverty ! for what is
there in thee dreadful to the WISE ? Temperance, Health,
and Frugality walk in thy train ; Cheerfulness and Liberty
are ever thy companions. Shall any be ashamed of thee,
of whom Cincinnatus was not ashamed ? The running
brook, the herbs of the field, can amply satisfy nature;
man wants but little, nor that little long.1 Come, then, O
Poverty, while kings stand by, and gaze with admiration
at the true philosopher's resignation ! "
The goddess appears; for Poverty ever comes at the
call; but, alas! he finds her by no means the charming
figure books and his warm imagination had painted. As
when an Eastern bride, whom her friends and relations
had long described as a model of perfection, pays her first
visit, the longing bridegroom lifts the veil to see a face he
had never seen before ; but instead of a countenance blaz-
ing with beauty like the sun, he beholds deformity shoot-
ing icicles to his heart: such appears Poverty to her new
entertainer; all the fabric of enthusiasm is at once de-
molished, and a thousand miseries rise up on its ruins,
while Contempt, with pointing finger, is foremost in the
hideous procession.
The poor man now finds that he can get no kings to
1 " Man wants but little; nor that little long."
YOUNG'S Right Thoughts.
Goldsmith has quoted, and improved the expression of Young's thought
in ' Edwin and Angelina;' see the Poems, vol. ii., p. 24.
" ' Man wants but little here below,
Nor wants that little long.'"—ED.
<pb>
look at him while he is eating; he finds that in propor-
tion as he grows poor, the world turns its back upon him,
and gives him leave to act the philosopher in all the
majesty of solitude. It might be agreeable enough to
play the philosopher while we are conscious that mankind
are spectators ; but what signifies wearing the mask of
sturdy contentment, and mounting the stage of restraint,
when not one creature will assist at the exhibition !l Thus
is he forsaken of men, while his fortitude wants the satis-
faction even of self-applause : for either he does not feel
his present calamities, and that is natural insensibility ;
or he disguises his feelings, and that is dissimulation.
Spleen now begins to take up the man : not distinguish-
ing in his resentments, he regards all mankind with detes-
tation, and commencing man-hater, seeks solitude to be at
liberty to rail.
It has been said, that he who retires to solitude is either
a beast or an angel. The censure is too severe, and the
praise unmerited; the discontented being, who retires
from society, is generally some good-natured man, who
has begun life without experience, and knew not how to
gain it in his intercourse with mankind. Adieu.
LETTEE LXVIII.
From Lien Ch i Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President of
the Ceremonial Academy at Pekin in China.
QUACKS RIDICULED. SOME PARTICULARLY MENTIONED.2
I FORMERLY acquainted thee, most grave Fum, with the
excellence of the English in the art of healing.3 The
1 Some similar remarks will be found in Letter CXIX., ' On the dis-
tresses of the Poor, exemplified in the Life of a Private Sentinel.' The
latter essay, however, was not contributed to the original, or Public
Ledger series, of these ' Citizen' Letters.—ED.
2 Dated Aug. 25, 1760, in the Public Ledger, It was afterwards
partly reprinted (with the first two paragraphs of Letter XXIV. for
opening) as Essay XX. of the ' Essays.' In the ' Essays' edition the paper
ended with the account of Dr. Franks—the account of Dr. Walker, the
challenge of Lien Chi Altangi, &c., being omitted.—ED.
3 See Letter XXIV.—ED.
<pb>
Chinese boast their skill in pulses, the Siamese their bota-
nical knowledge, but the English advertising physicians
alone of being the great restorers of health, the dispensers
of youth, and the insurers of longevity. I can never enough
admire the sagacity of this country, for the encouragement
given to the professors of this art: with what indulgence
does she foster up those of her own growth, and kindly
cherish those that come from abroad! Like a skilful
gardener, she invites them from every foreign climate to
herself. Here every great exotic strikes root as soon as
imported, and feels the genial beam of favour; while the
mighty metropolis, like one vast munificent dunghill, re-
ceives them indiscriminately to her breast, and supplies
each with more than native nourishment.
In other countries, the physician pretends to cure dis-
orders in the lump: the same doctor who combats the
gout in the toe, shall pretend to prescribe for a pain in
the head; and he who at one time cures a consumption,
shall at another give drugs for a dropsy. How absurd
and ridiculous! this is being a mere jack-of-all trades.
Is the animal machine less complicated than a brass pin ?
Not less than ten different hands are required to make
a pin; and shall the body be set right by one single
operator ?
The English are sensible of the force of this reasoning;
they have, therefore, one doctor for the eyes, another for
the toes; they have their sciatica doctors, and inoculating
doctors; they have one doctor who is modestly content
with securing them from bug-bites, and five hundred who
prescribe for the bite of mad dogs.
The learned are not here retired, with vicious modesty,
from public view; for every dead wall is covered with their
names, their abilities, their amazing cures, and places of
abode. Few patients can escape falling into their hands,
unless blasted by lightning, or struck dead with some
sudden disorder. It may sometimes happen, that a stranger,
who does not understand English, or a countryman who
cannot read, dies, without ever hearing of the vivifying
drops, or restorative electuary; but, for my part, before I
was a week in town, I had learned to bid the whole cata-
logue of disorders defiance, and was perfectly acquainted
<pb>
with the names and the medicines of every great man, or
great woman of them all.
But as nothing pleases curiosity more than anecdotes of
the great, however minute or trifling, I must present you,
inadequate as my abilities are to the subject, with some
account of those personages who lead in this honourable
profession.
The first upon the list of glory is Doctor Richard Rock,
F. TJ. N.1 This great man, short of stature, is fat, and
waddles as he walks. He always wears a white three-
tailed wig nicely combed, and frizzed upon each cheek;
sometimes he carries a cane, but a hat never. It is indeed
very remarkable, that this extraordinary personage should
never wear a hat, but so it is, he never wears a hat. He is
usually drawn" at the top of his own bills, sitting in his
arm-chair, holding a little bottle between his finger and
thumb, and surrounded with rotten teeth, nippers, pills,
packets, and gallipots. No man can promise fairer nor
better than he; for, as he observes, " Be your disorder
never so far gone, be under no uneasiness, make yourself
quite easy : I can cure you."
The next in fame, though by some reckoned of equal
pretensions, is Doctor Timothy Franks, F. O. G. H.3 living
in a place called the Old Bailey. As Rock is remarkably
squab, his great rival, Franks, is as remarkably tall.
He was born in the year of the Christian era 1692,
and is, while I now write, exactly sixty-eight years,
three months, and four days old. Age, however, has
no way impaired his usual health and vivacity: I am
told he generally walks with his breast open. This
gentleman, who is of a mixed reputation, is particularly
remarkable for a becoming assurance, which carries him
gently through life; for, except Doctor Rock, none are
more blessed with the advantages of face than Doctor
Franks.
And yet the great have their foibles as well as the little.
1 The Public Ledger has—" M. L. F. U. N."—ED.
2 The Ledger has also—" but with no flattering likeness."—ED.
3 The " F. O. G. H." here, and " F. U. N." appended to the name of
Dr. Rock, were omitted from the second edition of the ' Essays,' after
haying appeared in the first edition.—ED.
<pb>
I am almost ashamed to mention it. 1 Let the foibles of
the great rest in peace. Yet I must impart the whole to
my friend.1 These two great men are actually now at
variance: yes, my dear Fum Hoam, by the head of our
grandfather, they are now at variance like mere men, mere
common mortals !2 The champion Eock advises the world
to beware of bog-trotting quacks, while Franks retorts the
wit and the sarcasm (for they have both a world of wit) by
fixing on his rival the odious appellation of Dumplin Dick.
He calls the serious Doctor Eock, Dumplin Dick! Head
of Confucius, what profanation ! Dumplin Dick ! What
a pity, ye powers, that the learned, who were born
mutually to assist in enlightening the world, should thus
differ among themselves, and make even the profession
ridiculous! Sure the world is wide enough, at least for
two great personages to figure in : men of science should
leave controversy to the little world below them; and then
we might see Eock and Franks walking together hand in
hand, smiling onward to immortality.*
Next to these is Doctor Walker, preparator of his own
medicines. This gentleman is remarkable for an aversion
to quacks; frequently cautioning the public to be careful
into what hands they commit their safety; by which he
'-1 Not in the Public Ledger version.—ED.
2 The Ledger text adds—" having engaged the whole literary world
on one side or the other of the quarrel."—ED.
3 The contentions of these irregulars in medicine for employment
occasionally furnished the public with amusement; and first, probably,
drew the attention of Goldsmith as subjects for an essay. In the jour-
nals of the time Franks advertised in bills against Rock: " Be not
Hocked into eternity by that vain and impudent pretender Dumpling
Dick, who still lives at the gate of the inn where he was once porter."
To which Rock rejoined: " If you would avoid destruction, avoid the
Old Bailey ; for there lives an old soldier discharged by the beat of
drum, who has killed his thousands, but not in battle; his pills are much
more fatal than were his bullets."—PRIOR. [It says something for the
liberality of John Newbery, or his editor, that Rock was at this time
a frequent advertiser in the Public Ledger. Indeed Newbery himself
may be viewed as coming to some extent under Goldsmith's lash in this
essay upon Quacks, seeing that he was the vendor of a dozen or more
of the popular patent medieines of the time, lists of which often appeared
in the advertisement columns of the Ledger. And that the admission of
the article into the Ledger was no mere oversight is shown by the
republication, also by Newbery, in the ' Citizen.'—ED.]
<pb>
would insinuate, that if they do not employ him alone,
they must be undone. His public spirit is equal to his
success. Not for himself, but his country, is the gallipot
prepared, and the drops sealed up with proper directions
for any part of the town or country : all this is for his
country's good ; so that he is now grown old in the prac-
tice of physic and virtue ; and, to use his own elegance of
expression, " There is not such another medicine as his in
the world again."
This, my friend, is a formidable triumvirate ; and yet,
formidable as they are, I am resolved to defend the honour
of Chinese physic against them all. I have made a vow to
summon Doctor Rock to a solemn disputation in all the
mysteries of the profession, before the face of every philo-
math, student in astrology, and member of the learned
societies. I adhere to, and venerate the doctrines of old
Wang-shu-ho. In the very teeth of opposition, I will
maintain, " That the heart is the son of the liver, which
has the kidneys for its mother, and the stomach for its
wife." l I have, therefore, drawn up a disputation chal-
lenge, which is to be sent speedily, to this effect:—.
" I, Lien Chi Altangi, 29. Jl. lit. ^J.2 native of Honan in
China, to Eichard Bock, F. U. N. native of Garbage Alley,
in Wapping, defiance : Though, Sir, I am perfectly sen-
sible of your importance, though no stranger to your
studies in the paths of nature, yet there may be many
things in the art of physic with which you are yet unac-
quainted. I know full well a doctor thou art, great Rock,
and so am I. Wherefore I challenge, and do hereby in-
vite you to a trial of learning upon hard problems, and
knotty physical points. In this debate we will calmly in-
vestigate the whole theory and practice of medicine, botany,
and chemistry ; and I invite all the philomaths, with many
of the lecturers in medicine, to be present at the dispute,
which, I hope, will be carried on with due decorum, with
proper gravity, and as befits men of erudition and science
among each other.3 But before we meet face to face, I
1 See Du Halde, vol. ii. fol. p. 185.—GOLDSMITH.
2 The Public Ledger lias—" I, Lien Chi Altangi, ffi. IP. D. $. U. $.,
native of Leotung," &c., followed by " Rock, L. M. F. U. N.," &c.—En.
3 The Public Ledger version has here also—" And I hereby object in
III. S
<pb>
would thus publicly, and in the face of the whole world,
desire you to answer me one question; I ask it with the
same earnestness with which you have often solicited the
public ; answer me, I say, at once, without having recourse
to your physical dictionary,—Which of those three dis-
orders incident to the human body, is the most fatal, the
syncope, parenthesis, or apoplexy ?l I beg your reply may be
as public as this my demand.2 I am, as hereafter may be,
your admirer, or your rival." Adieu.
LETTER LXIX.
To the Same.
THE FEAR OF MAD DOGS RIDICULED.3
INDULGENT Nature seems to have exempted this island
from many of those epidemic evils which are so fatal in
other parts of the world. A want of rain but for a few
days beyond the expected season in China,4 spreads famine,
desolation, and terror, over the whole country ; 6the winds
that blow from the brown bosom of the western desert are
impregnated with death in every gale ;5 but, in this for-
tunate land of Britain, the inhabitant courts health in
every breeze, and the husbandman ever sows in joyful
expectation.
advance to your speaking or disputing in such languages as I am un-
acquainted with. You are at liberty to use English, Chinese, Latin,
Greek, Arabic, French, Spanish, or Italian, in these you may speak;
but if through an affectation of learning you choose to dispute in the
Koptic, the Hebrew, the Syriac, or the Samaritan, I shall look upon it
only as a subterfuge to avoid this fair invitation, nor will all your learning
avail you."—ED.
1 The Ledger has—" syncope, paragoge, or the apoplexy."—ED.
2 The day after this was published the editor received an answer, in
which the doctor seems to be of opinion that the apoplexy is most fatal.
—GOLDSMITH. [This note did not appear in the Public Ledger.—ED.]
3 Reprinted (slightly altered) in 1765 as No. XIII. of the " Essays."
The date of publication in the Public Ledger was Aug. 29, 1760.—ED.
4 In lieu of " China " the ' Essays' version reads—" some parts of the
globe."—ED.
6-5 Not in the ' Essays' version.—ED.
<pb>
But though the nation be exempt from real evils, think
not, my friend, that it is more happy on this account than
others. They are afflicted, it is true, with neither famine
nor pestilence, but then there is a disorder peculiar to the
country, which every season makes strange ravages among
them; it spreads with pestilential rapidity, and infects
almost every rank of people ; what is still more strange,
the natives have no name for this peculiar malady, though
well known to foreigh physicians by the appellation of
Epidemic terror.
A season is never known to pass in which the people are
not visited by this cruel calamity in one shape or another,
seemingly different though ever the same. One year it
issues from a baker's shop in the shape of a sixpenny loaf;
the next, it takes the appearance of a comet with a fiery
tail; a third, it threatens like a flat-bottomed boat;l and
a fourth, it carries consternation at the bite of a mad dog.
The people, when once infected, lose their relish for happi-
ness, saunter about with looks of despondence, ask after
the calamities of the day, and receive no comfort but in
heightening each other's distress. It is insignificant how
remote or near, how weak or powerful, the objects of terror
may be; when once they resolve to fright and be frighted
the merest trifles sow consternation and dismay ; each pro-
portions his fears, not to the object, but to the dread he
discovers in the countenance of others; for when once
the fermentation is begun, it goes on of itself, though
the original cause be discontinued which first set it in
motion.
A dread of mad dogs is the epidemic terror which now
prevails ; and the whole nation is at present actually groan-
ing under the malignity of its influence. The people sally
from their houses with that circumspection which is pru-
dent in such as expect a mad dog at every turning. The
physician publishes his prescription, the beadle prepares
his halter, and a few of unusual bravery arm themselves
with boots and buff gloves, in order to face the enemy if
he should offer to attack them. In short, the whole people
stand bravely upon their defence, and seem, by their pre-
1 Referring to panics of invasion.—ED.
<pb>
sent spirit, to show a resolution of not being tamely bit by
mad dogs any longer.1
Their manner of knowing whether a dog be mad or no,
somewhat resembles the ancient European custom of trying
witches. The old woman suspected was tied hand and
foot, and thrown into the water. If she swam, then she
was instantly carried off to be burnt for a witch; if she
sank, then indeed she was acquitted of the charge, but
drowned in the experiment.2 In the same manner a crowd
gather round a dog suspected of madness, and they begin
by teasing the devoted animal on every side; if he
attempts to stand upon the defensive and bite, then he is
unanimously found guilty, for " a mad dog always snaps
at everything;" if, on the contrary, he strives to escape
by running away, then he can expect no compassion, for
" mad dogs always run straight forward before them."
It is pleasant enough for a neutral being like me, who
have no share in these ideal calamities, to mark the stages
of this national disease. The terror at first feebly enters
with a disregarded story of a little dog, that had gone
1 This was the scare against mad dogs which produced our author's
' Elegy on the Death of a Mad Dog' (see vol. ii., p. 89). Of its viru-
lence the columns of the Pitblic Ledger are witnesses. Several numbers
of the paper about the date of this essay are half filled with letters and
paragraphs upon the subject. Here, with cures for mad-dog bites,
appear Drs. Parsons and Dale 1 ngram among the " physicians " Gold-
smith mentions, while Lord Mayor Chitty himself, as promulgator of a
sanguinary order in (Common) Council against the dogs, may be said
to be the sufficient representative of our author's " beadle" with " his
halter," &c. The following are portions of the document put forth by
the Lord Mayor and Common Council: —" Chitty, Mayor," is the
official heading, followed by " At a Common Council," &c. Then it
is " Ordered" that every beadle, constable, watchman, &c., is to kill all
dogs " found in the streets and highways " of his ward, and that for
this service he "shall be entitled to receive two shillings from the
Deputy of the ward, who shall be repaid by the Chamberlain of the
City, for every dog so killed and by him buried in the Skin, being
first several times slashed in the body : And this Court doth give leave
to all persons whatever to bury Dogs on this occasion in the two further-
most quarters of Moorfields, from Bethlem." Altogether this was
evidently a very bad mad-dog scare indeed; and yet we find that Gold-
smith was upon this occasion bold enough to attempt to muzzle the
maddest of the mad—that is to say, the rabid public.—ED.
2 Compare with King James I.'s " famous way of trying witches," in
the article on " Deceit and Falsehood " in the' Bee' (vol. ii., p. 443).—ED.
<pb>
261
through a neighbouring village, that was thought to be
mad by several that had seen him. The next account
comes, that a mastiff ran through a certain town, and had
bit five geese, which immediately ran mad, foamed at the
bill, and died in great agonies soon after. Then comes an
affecting history of a little boy bit in the leg, and gone
down to be dipt in the salt water. When the people have
sufficiently shuddered at that, they are next congealed
with a frightful account of a man who was said lately to
have died from a bite he had received some years before.
This relation only prepares the way for another still more
hideous, as how the master of a family, with seven small
children, were all bit by a mad lap-dog ; and how the poor
father first perceived the infection, by calling for a draught
of water, where he saw the lap-dog swimming in the cup.
When epidemic terror is thus once excited, every morn-
ing comes loaded with some new disaster : as, in stories of
ghosts, each loves to hear the account, though it only
serves to make him uneasy, so here each listens with
eagerness, and adds to the tidings with new circumstances of
peculiar horror. A lady, for instance, in the country, of very
weak nerves, has been frighted by the barking of a dog ;
and this, alas ! too frequently happens. The story soon
is improved and spreads, that a mad dog had frighted a
lady of distinction. These circumstances begin to grow
terrible before they have reached the neighbouring village,
and there the report is, that a lady of quality was bit by a
mad mastiff. This account every moment gathers new
strength, and grows more dismal as it approaches the
capital; and by the time it has arrived in town, the lady is
described, with wild eyes, foaming mouth, running mad
upon all-fours, barking like a dog, biting her servants, and
at last smothered between two beds by the advice of her
doctors; while the mad mastiff is in the meantime ranging
the whole country over, slavering at the mouth, and seek-
ing whom he may devour.
My landlady, a good-natured woman, but a little credu-
lous, waked me some mornings ag'o before the usual hour,
with horror and astonishment in her looks : she desired
me, if I had any regard for my safety, to keep within; for
a few days ago so dismal an accident had happened, as to
r
<pb>
put all the world upon their guard. A mad dog down in
the country, she assured me, had bit a farmer, who soon
becoming mad, ran into his own yard, and bit a fine
brindled cow ; the cow quickly became as mad as the man,
began to foam at the mouth, and raising herself up,
walked about on her hind legs, sometimes barking like a
dog, and sometimes attempting to talk like the farmer.
Upon examining the grounds of this story, I found my
landlady had it from one neighbour, who had it from an-
other neighbour, who heard it from very good authority.
Were most stories of this nature thoroughly examined,
it would be found that numbers of such as have been said
to suffer were no way injured; and that of those who
have been actually bitten, not one in a hundred was bit by
a mad dog. Such accounts in general, therefore, only
serve to make the people miserable by false terrors, and
sometimes fright the patient into actual frenzy by creating
those very symptoms they pretended to deplore.
But even allowing three or four to die in a season of
this terrible death, (and four is probably too large a con-
cession), yet still it is not considered, how many are pre-
served in their health and in their property by this de-
voted animal's services. The midnight robber is kept at
a distance; the insidious thief is often detected; the
healthful chase repairs many a worn constitution ; and the
poor man finds in his dog a willing assistant, eager to
lessen his toil, and content with the smallest retribution.
" A dog," says one of the English poets, " is an honest
creature, and I am a friend to dogs." ' Of all the beasts
that graze the lawn or hunt the forest, a dog is the only
animal that, leaving his fellows, attempts to cultivate the
friendship of man : to man he looks in all his necessities
with a speaking eye for assistance ; exerts for him all the
little service in his power with cheerfulness and pleasure ;
for him bears famine and fatigue with patience and resig-
1 Probably Otway, who has in ' Venice Preserved,' act ii., sc. 2, the
lines—
" Jaffier. What's he that asks the question ?
" Pierre. A friend to dogs, for they are honest creatures,
And ne'er betray their masters; never fawn
On any that they love not."—EC.
<pb>
263
nation; no injuries can abate his fidelity; no distress
induce him to forsake his benefactor : studious to please,
and fearing to offend, he is still a humble steadfast depen-
dant); and in him alone fawning is not flattery. How
unkind, then, to torture this faithful creature, who has
left the forest to claim the protection of man ! how un-
grateful a return to the trusty animal for all his services !
Adieu.
LETTER LXX.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Hingpo, by the way of
Moscow.
FORTUNE PROVED NOT TO BE BLIND. THE STORY OF THE
AVARICIOUS MILLER.1
THE Europeans are themselves blind, who describe For-
tune without sight. No first-rate beauty ever had finer
eyes, or saw more clearly : they who have no other trade
but seeking their fortune need never hope to find her;
coquette-like, she flies from her close pursuers, and at last
fixes on the plodding mechanic, who stays at home, and
minds his business.
I am amazed how men call her blind, when, by the
company she keeps, she seems so very discerning. Wher-
ever you see a gaming-table, be very sure Fortune is not
there; wherever you see a house with the doors open, be
very sure Fortune is not there ;2 when you see a man whose
pocket-holes are laced with gold, be satisfied Fortune is
not there ; wherever you see a beautiful woman good-
1 Dated Sept. 1, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
2 Compare with the numerous stories of Goldsmith's passion for
gaming. Apropos, Judge Day told Prior : " The poet frequented much
the Grecian Coffee-house, then the favourite resort of the Irish and
Lancashire Templars. . . . Occasionally he amused them with his flute
or with whist, neither of which he played well, particularly the latter,
but in losing his money he never lost his temper. In a run of bad luck
and worse play, he would fling his cards upon the floor and exclaim,
' Sye-fore George, I ought for ever to renounce thee, faithless, fickle
Fortune!' " See Day's letter in our fourth vol.—ED.
<pb>
natured and obliging, be convinced Fortune is never there.
In short, she is ever seen accompanying industry, and as
often trundling a wheelbarrow as lolling in a coach and
six.
If you would make Fortune your friend, or, to personise
her no longer, if you desire, my son, to be rich, and have
money, be more eager to save than acquire: when people
say, money is to be got here, and money is to be got there,
take no notice ; mind your own business ; stay where you
are, and secure, all you can get without stirring. When
you hear that your neighbour has picked up a purse of
gold in the street, never run out in the same street, look-
ing about you in order to pick up such another; or when
you are informed that he has made a fortune in one branch
of business, never change your own in order to be his
rival. Do not desire to be rich all at once ; but patiently
add farthing to farthing. Perhaps you despise the petty
sum; and yet they who want a farthing, and have no friend
that will lend them it, think farthings very good things.
Whang, the foolish miller, when he wanted a farthing in
his distress, found that no friend would lend because they
knew he wanted. Did you ever read the story of Whang
in our books of Chinese learning; he who, despising small
sums, and grasping at all, lost even what he had ?
Whang, the miller, was naturally avaricious; nobody
loved money better than he, or more respected those that
had it. When people would talk of a rich man in company,
Whang would say, " I know him very well; he and I have
been long acquainted; he and I are intimate; he stood for
a child of mine : " but if ever a poor man was mentioned,
he had not the least knowledge of the man; he might be
very well for aught he knew; but he was not fond of
many acquaintances, and loved to choose his company.
Whang, however, with all his eagerness for riches, was
in reality poor; he had nothing but the profits of his mill
to support him ; but though these were small, they were
certain; while his mill stood and went, he was sure of
eating, and his frugality was such, that he every day laid
some money by, which he would at intervals count and
contemplate with much satisfaction. Yet still his acqui-
sitions were not equal to his desires ; he only found him-
<pb>
265
self above want, whereas he desired to be possessed of
affluence.
One day as he was indulging these wishes, he was in-
formed, that a neighbour of his had found a pan of money
under ground, having dreamed of it three nights running
before. These tidings were daggers to the heart of poor
Whang. " Here am I," says he, " toiling and moiling
from morning till night for a few paltry farthings, while
neighbour Hunks only goes quietly to bed, and dreams
himself into thousands before morning. Oh, that I could
dream like him! with what pleasure would I dig round
the pan ; how slily would I carry it home ; not even my
wife should see me; and then, oh, the pleasure of thrust-
ing one's hand into a heap of gold up to the elbow ! "
Such reflections only served to make the miller unhappy;
he discontinued his former assiduity,—he was quite dis-
gusted with small gains, and his customers began to for-
sake him. Every day he repeated the wish, and every
night laid himself down in order to dream. Fortune, that
was for a long time unkind, at last, however, seemed to
smile upon his distresses, and indulged him with the
wished-for vision. He dreamed, that under a certain part
of the foundation of his mill, there was concealed a mon-
strous pan of gold and diamonds, buried deep in the
ground, and covered with a large flat stone. He rose up,
thanked the stars that were at last pleased to take pity
on his sufferings, and concealed his good luck from every
person, as is usual in money dreams, in order to have the
vision repeated the two succeeding nights, by which he
should be certain of its veracity. His wishes in this also
were answered; he still dreamed of the same pan of money,
in the very same place.
Now, therefore, it was past a doubt; so, getting up
early the third morning, he repairs alone, with a mattock
in his hand, to the mill, and began to undermine that
part of the wall which the vision directed. The first omen
of success that he met was a broken mug; digging still
deeper, he turns up a house tile, quite new and entire. At
last, after much digging, he came to the broad flat stone,
but then so large, that it was beyond one man's strength
to remove it. " Here," cried he, in raptures to himself;
<pb>
" here it is ! under this stone there is room for a very
large pan of diamonds indeed ! I must e'en go home to
my wife, and tell her the whole affair, and get her to
assist me in turning it up." Away therefore he goes, and
acquaints his wife with every circumstance of their good
fortune. Her raptures on this occasion easily may be
imagined ; she flew round his neck, and embraced him in
an agony of joy; but those transports, however, did not
delay their eagerness to know the exact sum; returning,
therefore, speedily together to the place where Whang
had been digging, there they found—not indeed the ex-
pected treasure, but the mill, their only support, under-
mined, and fallen. Adieu.
LETTER LXXI.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President, &c.
THE SHABBY BEAU, THE MAN IN BLACK, THE CHINESE
PHILOSOPHEB, ETC., AT VAUXHALL.1
THE people of London are as 'fond of walking as our
friends at Pekin of riding; one of the principal entertain-
ments of the citizens here in summer is to repair about
nightfall to a garden not far from town, where they walk
about, show their best clothes and best faces, and listen
to a concert provided for the occasion.
I accepted an invitation a few evenings ago from my old
friend, the man in black, to be one of a party that was to
sup there ; and at the appointed hour waited upon him at
his lodgings. There I found the company assembled, and
expecting my arrival. Our party consisted of my friend
in superlative finery, his stockings rolled, a black velvet
waistcoat, which was formerly new, and a grey wig combed
down in imitation of hair; a pawnbroker's widow, of
whom, by the by, my friend was a professed admirer,
dressed out in green damask, with three gold rings on every
finger; Mr. Tibbs, the second-rate beau I have formerly
1 Dated Sept. 2, 1760, in the Pitblic Ledger.—Ea>.
<pb>
267
described, together with his lady, in flimsy silk, dirty
gauze instead of linen, and a hat as big as an umbrella.
Our first difficulty was in settling how we should set
out. Mrs. Tibbs had a natural aversion to the water, and
the widow, being a little in flesh, as warmly protested
against walking; a coach was therefore agreed upon ;
which being too small to carry five, Mr. Tibbs consented
to sit in his wife's lap.
In this manner, therefore, we set forward, being enter-
tained by the way with the bodings of Mr. Tibbs, who
assured us he did not expect to see a single creature for
the evening above the degree of a cheesemonger; that this
was the last night of the gardens, and that consequently
we should be pestered with the nobility and gentry from
Thames Street and Crooked Lane; with several other
prophetic ejaculations, probably inspired by the uneasi-
ness of his situation.
The illuminations began before we arrived, and I must
confess, that upon entering the gardens I found every
sense overpaid with more than expected pleasure : the
lights every where glimmering through the scarcely-moving
trees—the full-bodied concert bursting on the stillness of
the night—the natural concert of the birds, in the more
retired part of the grove vieing with that which was formed
by art; the company gaily dressed, looking satisfaction,
and the table spread with various delicacies, all conspired
to fill my imagination with the visionary happiness of the
Arabian lawgiver, and lifted me into an ecstasy of admi-
ration. " Head of Confucius," cried I to my friend, " this
is fine ! this unites rural beauty with courtly magnificence!
If we except the virgins of immortality, that hang on
every tree, and may be plucked at every desire, I do not
see how this falls short of Mahomet's Paradise ! "—" As
for virgins," cries my friend, " it is true they are a fruit
that do not much abound in our gardens here;' but if
ladies, as plenty as apples in autumn, and as complying as
any Houri of them all, can content you, I fancy we have
no need to go to heaven for Paradise." 2
1 The Public Ledger reads—" gardens about London."—ED.
2 Mr. Forster in this connection has called attention to Judge Day's
reference to Goldsmith's liking for Vauxhall and such places (see Day's
<pb>
I was going to second his remarks, when we were called
to a consultation by Mr. Tibbs and the rest of the com-
pany, to know in what manner we were to lay out the
evening to the greatest advantage. Mrs. Tibbs was for
keeping the genteel walk of the garden, where, she ob-
served, there was always the very best company; the
widow, on the contrary, who came but once a season, was
for securing a good standing place to see the waterworks,
which she assured us would begin in less than an hour at
farthest; a dispute therefore began, and as it was managed
between two of very opposite characters, it threatened to
grow more bitter at every reply. Mrs. Tibbs wondered
how people could pretend to know the polite world, who
had received all their rudiments of breeding behind a
counter; to which the other replied, that though some
people sat behind counters, yet they could sit at the head
of their own tables too, and carve three good dishes of hot
meat whenever they thought proper, which was more than
some people could say for themselves, that hardly knew a
rabbit and onions from a green goose and gooseberries.
It is hard to say where this might have ended, had not
the husband, who probably knew the impetuosity of his
wife's disposition, proposed to end the dispute by adjourn-
ing to a box, and try if there was any thing to be had for
supper that was supportable. To this we all consented;
but here a new distress arose : Mr. and Mrs. Tibbs would
sit in none but a genteel box—a box where they might see
and be seen—one, as they expressed it, in the very focus
of public view ; but such a box was not easy to be obtained,
for though we were perfectly convinced of our own gentility,
and the gentility of our appearance, yet we found it a
difficult matter to persuade the keepers of the boxes to be
of our opinion; they chose to reserve genteel boxes for
what they judged more genteel company.
At last, however, we were fixed, though somewhat ob-
letter in our vol. iv.), thinking, apparently, that the ecstasies of the
Chinese expressed above are to some extent those of the author himself.
If they are, they may be paralleled with similar expressions of admira-
tion lavished upon Vauxhall and lianelagh (the " covered Vauxhall")
by Addison, Johnson, Boswell, and even the fastidious Horace Walpole;
see Boswell's ' Life of Johnson,' the Spectator, No. 383, Sic.—ED.
<pb>
scurely, and supplied with the usual entertainment of the
place. The widow-found the supper excellent, but Mrs.
Tibbs thought every thing detestable. " Come, come, my
dear," cries the husband, by way of consolation, "to be
sure we can't find such dressing here as we have at Lord
Crump's or Lady Crimp's ; but, for Vauxhall dressing, it
is pretty good : it is not their victuals, indeed, I find fault
with, but their wine; their wine," cries he, drinking off a
glass, " indeed, is most abominable."
By this last contradiction, the widow was fairly con-
quered in point of politeness. She perceived now that
she had no pretensions in the world to taste ; her very
senses were vulgar, since she had praised detestable cus-
tard, and smacked at wretched wine; she was therefore
content to yield the victory, and for the rest of the night
to listen and improve. It is true, she would now and then
forget herself, and confess she was pleased, but they soon
brought her back again to miserable refinement. She once
praised the painting of the box in which we were sitting,
but was soon convinced that such paltry pieces ought
rather to excite horror than satisfaction : she ventured
again to commend one of the singers, but Mrs. Tibbs soon
let her know, in the style of a connoisseur, that the singer
in question had neither ear, voice, nor judgment.
Mr. Tibbs, now, willing to prove that his wife's preten-
sions to music were just, entreated her to favour the com-
pany with a song; but to this she gave a positive denial—
" for you know very well, my dear," says she, " that I am
not in voice to-day, and when one's voice is not equal to
one's judgment, what signifies singing ? besides, as there
is no accompaniment, it would be but spoiling music." All
these excuses, however, were overruled by the rest of the
company, who, though one would think they already had
music enough, joined in the entreaty. But particularly
the widow, now willing to convince the company of her
breeding, pressed so warmly, that she seemed determined
to take no refusal. At last, then, the lady complied, and
after humming for some minutes, began with such a voice,
and such affectation, as, I could perceive, gave but little
satisfaction to any except her husband. He sat with rap-
ture in his eye, and beat time with his hand on the table.
<pb>
You must observe, my friend, that it is the custom of
this country, when a lady or gentleman happens to sing,
for the company to sit as mute and motionless as statues.
Every feature, every limb, must seem to correspond in
fixed attention ; and while the song continues, they are to
remain in a state of universal petrifaction. In this morti-
fying situation we had continued for some time, listening
to the song, and looking with tranquillity, when the
master of the box came to inform us, that the waterworks
were going to begin. At this information I could instantly
perceive the widow bounce from her seat; but correcting
herself, she sat down again, repressed by motives of good
breeding. Mrs. Tibbs, who had seen the waterworks a
hundred times, resolving not to be interrupted, continued
her song without any share of mercy, nor had the smallest
pity on our impatience. The widow's face, I own, gave me
high entertainment; in it I could plainly read the struggle
she felt between good-breeding and curiosity : she talked
of the waterworks the whole evening before, and seemed
to have come merely in order to see them; but then she
could not bounce out in the very middle of a song, for that
would be forfeiting all pretensions to high life, or high-
lived company, ever after. Mrs. Tibbs, therefore, kept on
singing, and we continued to listen, till at last, when the
song was just concluded, the waiter came to inform us that
the waterworks were over !
" The waterworks over !" cried the widow; " the water-
works over already! that's impossible ! they can't be over
so soon ! "—" It is not my business," replied the fellow,
" to contradict your ladyship; I'll run again and see."
He went, and soon returned with a confirmation of the
dismal tidings. No ceremony could now bind my friend's
disappointed mistress; she testified her displeasure in the
openest manner: in short, she now began to find fault in
turn, and at last insisted upon going home, just at the
time that Mr. and Mrs. Tibbs assured the company, that
the polite hours were going to begin, and that the ladies
would instantaneously be entertained with the horns.
Adieu.1
' These were perhaps the best days of Vauxhall. Jonathan Tyers,
the reviver (in 1732) and improver of the gardens here, which before his
<pb>
LETTER LXXIL
To the Same.
THE MARRIAGE ACT CENSURED.1
NOT far from this city lives a poor tinker, who has
educated seven sons, all at this very time in arms, and
fighting for their country; and what reward do you think
has the tinker from the state for such important services ?
None in the world : his sons, when the war is over, may
probably be whipt from parish to parish as vagabonds,
and the old man, when past labour, may die a prisoner in
some house of correction.
time were called " the New Spring Gardens at Fox [or Faux] Hall," was
still the liberal and tasteful manager, and the price of admission was still
the popular shilling. Tyers was the father of Goldsmith's and Dr. John-
son's friend, Tom Tyers. ' London and its Environs Described,' pub-
lished by the Dodsleys in 1761, gives the following account of the chief
attractions of Vauxhall Gardens at this time: " In the midst of the
garden is a superb orchestre containing a fine organ and a band of music
with some of the best voices, and the seats or boxes are disposed to the
best advantage with respect to hearing the music. In most of the boxes
are pictures painted from designs by Mr. Hayman [with some by a
greater than Hayman, namely, Hogarth]. . . . The trees are scattered
here with a pleasing confusion. At some distance are several noble
vistas of very tall trees, where the spaces between each are filled up with
neat hedges, and on the inside are planted flowers and sweet smelling
shrubs. Some of these vistas terminate in a view of ruins, and others in
a prospect of the adjacent country, and some are adorned with the
painted representation of triumphal arches. There are here also several
statues, and in particular a good one in marble by Mr. Houbiliac of the
late Mr. Handell playing on the lyre in the character of Orpheus. As
Eanelagh has its rotunda, so here also is a rotund and a ball room, finely
illuminated When it grows dark the garden near the orchestre is
illuminated almost in an instant, with about 1500 glass lamps, which
glitter among the trees, and render it exceedingly light and brilliant,"
&c., &c. Later, the admission price was raised, and then fluctuations of
fortune as well as of price set in, till, finally," the gardens " closed in our
own time (1859), and the land was built upon. See also the note to
another essay upon Vauxhall (on the singers,' Mrs. Vincent and Miss
Brent') in our vol. iv.—ED.
1 Possibly Lord Hardwick's Act of 1753, which did away with the
Fleet marriages and some other abuses, but was for a time very un-
popular. The date of this essay in the Pttblic Ledger was Sept. 10,
1760. Goldsmith continued the subject in Letter CXIV.—ED.
<pb>
Such a worthy subject in China would be held in
universal reverence ; his services would be rewarded, if not
with dignities, at least with an exemption from labour ; he
would take the left hand at feasts, and mandarines them-
selves would be proud to show their submission. The
English laws punish vice; the Chinese laws do more,—
they reward virtue!
Considering the little encouragement given to matrimony
here, I am not surprised at the discouragement given to
propagation. Would you believe it, my dear Fum Hoam,
there are laws made which even forbid the people's marry-
ing each other! By the head of Confucius, I jest not;
there are such laws in being here; and yet their lawgivers
have never been instructed among the Hottentots, nor
imbibed their principles of equity from the natives of
Anamaboo.
There are laws which ordain, that no man shall marry
a woman against her own consent. This, though contrary
to what we are taught in Asia, and though in some
measure a clog upon matrimony, I have no great objection
to. There are laws which ordain, that no woman shall
marry against her father and mother's consent, unless
arrived at an age of maturity; by which is understood
those years when women with us are generally past child-
bearing. This must be a clog upon matrimony, as it is
more difficult for the lover to please three than one, and
much more difficult to please old people than young ones.
The laws ordain, that the consenting couple shall take a
long time to consider before they marry: this is a very
great clog, because people love to have all rash actions
done in a hurry. It is ordained, that all marriages shall
be proclaimed before celebration: this is a severe clog, as
many are ashamed to have their marriage made public,
from motives of vicious modesty, and many afraid, from
views of temporal interest. It is ordained, that there is
nothing sacred in the ceremony but that it may be dis-
solved, to all intents and purposes, by the authority of any
civil magistrate. And yet, opposite to this, it is ordained,
that the priest shall be paid a large sum of money for
granting his sacred permission.
Thus, you see, my friend, that matrimony here is hedged
<pb>
round with so many obstructions, that those who are will-
ing to break through or surmount them must be contented
if at last they find it a|bed of thorns. The laws are not
to blame, for they have deterred the people from engaging
as much as they could. It is, indeed, become a very
serious affair in England, and none but serious people are
generally found willing to engage. The young, the gay,
and the beautiful, who have motives of passion only to in-
duce them, are seldom found to embark, as those induce-
ments are taken away; and none but the old, the ugly, and
the mercenary are seen to unite, who, if they have any
posterity at all, will probably be an ill-favoured race like
themselves.
What gave rise to those laws might have been some
such accidents as these: It sometimes happened that a
miser, who had spent all his youth in scraping up money
to give his daughter such a fortune as might get her a
mandarine husband, found his expectations disappointed
at last, by her running away with his footman: this must
have been a sad shock to the poor disconsolate parent, to
see his poor daughter in a one horse chaise, when he had
designed her for a coach and six. What a stroke from
Providence ! to see his dear money go to enrich a beggar ;
all nature cried out at the profanation !
It sometimes happened, also, that a lady, who had in-
herited all the titles, and all the nervous complaints of
nobility, thought fit to impair her dignity, and mend her
constitution, by marrying a farmer: this must have been
a sad shock to her inconsolable relations, to see so fine a
flower snatched from a flourishing family, and planted in
a dunghill; this was an absolute inversion of the first
principles of things.
In order, therefore, to prevent the great from being
thus contaminated by vulgar alliances, the obstacles to
matrimony have been so contrived, that the rich only can
marry amongst the rich; and the poor, who would leave
celibacy, must be content to increase their poverty with a
wife. Thus have their laws fairly inverted the induce-
ments to matrimony. Nature tells us, that beauty is the
proper allurement of those who are rich, and money of
those who are poor ; but things here are so contrived, that
IIT. T
<pb>
the rich are invited to marry by that fortune which they
do not want, and the poor have no inducement but that
beauty which they do not feel.
An equal diffusion of riches through any country ever
constitutes its happiness. Great wealth in the possession
of one stagnates, and extreme poverty with another keeps
him in unambitious indigence; but the moderately rich
are generally active: not too far removed from poverty to
fear its calamities, nor too near extreme wealth to slacken
the nerve of labour, they remain still between both in a
state of continual fluctuation. How impolitic, therefore,
are those laws which promote the accumulation of wealth
among the rich; more impolitic still, in attempting to
increase the depression on poverty!
Bacon, the English philosopher, compares money to
manure, " If gathered in heaps," says he, "it does no
good; on the contrary, it becomes offensive. But being
spread, though never so thinly, over the surface of the
earth, it enriches the whole country." Thus the wealth a
nation possesses must expatiate, or it is of no benefit to the
public; it becomes rather a grievance, where matrimonial
laws thus confine it to a few.1
But this restraint upon matrimonial community, even
considered in a physical light, is injurious. As those who
rear up animals, take all possible pains to cross the strain,
in order to improve the breed; so in those countries where
marriage is most free, the inhabitants are found every age
to improve in stature and in beauty; on the contrary,
where it is confined to a caste, a tribe, or an horde, as
among the Gaurs,2 the Jews, or the Tartars, each division
soon assumes a family likeness, and every tribe degenerates
into peculiar deformity. From hence it may be easily in-
ferred, that if the mandarines here are resolved only to
marry among each other, they will soon produce a posterity
with mandarine faces; and we shall see the heir of some
honourable family scarce equal to the abortion of a country
farmer.
1 This paragraph does not appear in the Public Ledger version.—ED.
2 Prior and Cunningham read Gaours. The Gaurs or Ghors of
Afghanistan (whence Giaour, Persian gdwr, infidel) are probably
meant.—ED.
<pb>
These are a few of the obstacles to marriage here, and
it is certain they have, in some measure, answered the end,
for celibacy is both frequent and fashionable. Old
bachelors appear abroad without a mask, and old maids,
my dear Fum Hoani, have been absolutely known to ogle.
To confess, in friendship; if I were an Englishman I fancy
I should be an old bachelor myself; I should never find
courage to run through all the adventures prescribed by
the law. I could submit to court my mistress herself
upon reasonable terms; but to court her father, her
mother, and a long tribe of cousins, aunts, and relations,
and then stand the butt of a whole country church ; I
would as soon turn tail, and make love to her grand-
mother.1
I can conceive no other reason for thus loading matri-
mony with so many prohibitions, unless it be that the
country was thought already too populous, and this was
found to be the most effectual means of thinning it. If
this was the motive, I cannot but congratulate the wise
projectors on the success of their scheme. Hail, O ye
dim-sighted politicians, ye weeders of men! 'Tis yours
to clip the wing of industry, and convert Hymen to a
broker. 'Tis yours to behold small objects with a micro-
scopic eye, but to be blind to those which require an extent
of vision. 'Tis yours, O ye discerners of mankind! to
lay the line between society, and weaken that force by
dividing, which should bind with united vigour. 'Tis
yours, to introduce national real distress, in order to
avoid the imaginary distresses of a few. Your actions
can be justified by a hundred reasons like truth ; they
can be opposed by but a few reasons, and those reasons
are true.—Farewell.
' The Public Ledger has " my grandmother."—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE LXXIII.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Hingpo, by ihe way of Moscow.
LIFE ENDEARED BY AGE.1
AGE, that lessens the enjoyment of life, increases our
desire of living. Those dangers which, in the vigour of
youth, we had learned to despise, assume new terrors as
we grow old. Our caution increasing as our years increase,
fear becomes at last the prevailing passion of the mind;
and the small remainder of life is taken up in useless
efforts to keep off our end, or provide for a continued
existence.
Strange contradiction in our nature, and to which even
the wise are liable! If I should judge of that part of life
which lies before me, by that which I have already seen,
the ,prospect is hideous.2 Experience tells me, that my
past enjoyments have brought no real felicity ; and sensa-
tion assures me, that those I have felt are stronger than
those which are yet to come. Yet experience and sensa-
tion in vain persuade; hope, more powerful than either,
dresses out the distant prospect in fancied beauty; some
happiness in long perspective still beckons me to pursue ;.
and, like a losing gamester, every new disappointment
increases my ardour to continue the game.
Whence, my friend, this increased love of life, which
grows upon us with our years ? whence comes it, that we-
thus make; greater efforts to preserve our existence, at a.
period when it becomes scarce worth the keeping ? Is it
that Nature, attentive to the preservation of mankind, in-
creases our wishes to live, while she lessens our enjoy-
ments ; and, as she robs the senses of every pleasure,
equips imagination in the spoil ? Life would be insup-
1 Reprinted in the 1765 and 1766 editions of the ' Essays' as Essay
XIV. The date in the Public Ledger is Sept. 12, 1760.—ED.
8 The author repeats this sentiment, in nearly the same words, in his-
comedy of ' The Good-Natured Man.' Vide scene in the First Act,
between Honeywood and Croaker.—B. [P. 155 in our vol. ii. ' The
Good-Natured Man' was produced in 1768.—ED.]
<pb>
portable to an old man, who, loaded with infirmities, feared
death no more than in the vigour of manhood: the num-
berless calamities of decaying nature, and the conscious-
ness of surviving every pleasure, would at once induce him,
with his own hand, to terminate the scene of misery : but
happily the contempt of death forsakes him, at a time
when it could only be prejudicial; and life acquires an
imaginary value, in proportion as its real value is no
more.
Our attachment to every object around us increases, in
general, from the length of our acquaintance with it. " I
would not choose," says a French philosopher, " to see an
old post pulled up with which I had been long acquainted."
A mind long habituated to a certain set of objects, in-
sensibly becomes fond of seeing them, visits them from
habit, and parts from them with reluctance; from hence
proceeds the avarice of the old in every kind of possession.
They love the world and all that it produces: they love
life and all its advantages; not because it gives them
pleasure, but because they have known it long.
Chinvang the Chaste, ascending the throne of China,
commanded that all who were unjustly detained in prison,
during the preceding reigns, should be set free. Among
the number who came to thank their deliverer on this
occasion, there appeared a majestic old man, who, falling
at the Emperor's feet, addressed him as follows :—" Great
father of China, behold a wretch, now eighty-five years
old, who was shut up in a dungeon at the age of twenty-
two. I was imprisoned, though a stranger to crime, or
without being even confronted by my accusers. I have
now lived in solitude and darkness for more than fifty
years, and am grown familiar with distress. As yet,
dazzled with the splendour of that sun to which you have
restored me, I have been wandering the streets to find
some friend that would assist, or relieve, or remember
me; but my friends, my family, and relations, are all dead,
and I am forgotten. Permit me, then, O Chinvang, to
-wear out the wretched remains of life in my former
prison; the walls of my dungeon are to me more pleasing
than the most splendid palace; I have not long to live,
and shall be unhappy except I spend the rest of my days
<pb>
where my youth was passed,—in that prison from whence
you were pleased to release me."
The old man's passion for confinement is similar to that
we all have for life. We are habituated to the prison, we
look round with discontent, are displeased with the abode,
and yet the length of our captivity only increases our
fondness for the cell. The trees we have planted, the
houses we have built, or the posterity we have begotten,
all serve to bind us closer to earth, and imbitter our part-
ing. Life sues the young like a new acquaintance; the
companion, as yet unexhausted, is at once instructive and
amusing; its ' company pleases ; yet, for all this, it is but
little regarded. To us who are declined in years, life
appears like an old friend; its jests have been anticipated
in former conversation; it has no new story to make us
smile, no new improvement with which to surprise, yet
still we love it; destitute of every enjoyment,2 still we love
it, husband the wasting treasure with increased frugality,
. and feel all the poignancy of anguish in the fatal separa-
tion.
Sir Philip Mordaunt was young, beautiful, sincere, brave,
an Englishman. He had a complete fortune of his own,
and the love of the king his master, which was equivalent
to riches. Life opened all her treasure before him, and
promised a long succession of future happiness. He came,
tasted of the entertainment,. but was disgusted even in
the beginning. He professed an aversion to living; was
tired of walking round the same circle; had tried every
enjoyment, and found them all grow weaker at every repe-
tition. " If life be in youth so displeasing," cried he to
himself, " what will it appear when age comes on ? if it be
at present indifferent, sure it will then be execrable."
This thought imbittered every reflection; till at last, with
all the serenity of perverted reason, he ended the debate
1 The first edition of the ' Citizen' has "'tis." The third edition has
" it is." The two editions of the ' Essays ' lead the way to the reading
" its." In the Public Ledger, however, the passage appears as fol-
lows :—" Life sues the young like a new acquaintance, the companion as
yet unexhausted, is at once instructive and amusing, his company
pleases, yet still he is but little regarded."—ED.
2 Percy's text has " every enjoyment." The earlier editions, including
the Ledger's, have " every agreement."—ED.
<pb>
with, a pistol! Had this self-deluded man been apprized,
that existence grows more desirable to us the longer we
exist, he would have then faced old age without shrinking,
he would have boldly dared to live, and served that society
by his future assiduity which he basely injured by his
desertion. Adieu.
LETTEE LXXIV.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President of
the Ceremonial Academy at Pekin in China.
IN reading the newspapers here, I have reckoned up not
less than twenty-five great men, seventeen very great men,
and nine very extraordinary men, in less than the compass
of half-a-year. " These," say the gazettes, " are the men
that posterity are to gaze at with admiration; these the
names that Fame will be employed in holding up for the
astonishment of succeeding ages." Let me see—forty-six
great men in half-a-year, amount to just ninety-two in a
year. I wonder how posterity will be able to remember
them all, or whether the people in future times will have
any other business to mind, but that of getting the
catalogue by heart.
Does the mayor of a corporation make a speech ?—he is
instantly set down for a great man.—Does a pedant digest
his commonplace-book into a folio ?—he quickly becomes
great. Does a poet string up trite sentiments in rhyme ?
he also becomes the great man of the hour. How diminu-
tive soever the object of admiration, each is followed by a
crowd of still more diminutive admirers. The shout be-
gins in his train ; onward he marches to immortality;
looks back at the pursuing crowd with self-satisfaction;
catching all the oddities, the whimsies, the absurdities, and
the littlenesses of conscious greatness by the way.
I was yesterday invited by a gentleman to dinner, who
1 Dated Sept. 15, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—En.
<pb>
promised that our entertainment should consist of a haunch
of venison, a turtle, and a great man. I came according
to appointment. The venison was fine, the turtle good,
but the great man insupportable. The moment I ventured
to speak, I was at once contradicted with a snap. I at-
tempted, by a second and a third assault, to retrieve my
lost reputation, but was still beat back with confusion. I
was resolved to attack him once more from entrenchment,
and turned the conversation upon the government of
China: but even here he asserted, snapped, and contra-
dicted as before. " Heavens," thought I, " this man pre-
tends to know China even better than myself !" I looked
round to see who was on my side; but every eye was fixed
in admiration on the great man: I therefore at last thought
proper to sit silent, and act the pretty gentleman during
the ensuing conversation.
When a man has once secured a circle of admirers, he
may be as ridieulous here as he thinks proper; and it all
passes for elevation of sentiment, or learned absence. If
he transgresses the common forms of breeding, mistakes
even a teapot for a tobacco-box, it is said that his thoughts
are fixed on more important objects : to speak and to act
like the rest of mankind is to be no greater than they.
There is something of oddity in the very idea of great-
ness ; for we are seldom astonished at a thing very much
resembling ourselves.
When the Tartars make a Lama, their first care is to
place him in a dark corner of the temple: here he is to
sit half concealed from view, to regulate the motion of his
hands, lips, and.eyes; but, above all, he is enjoined gravity
and silence. This, however, is but the prelude to his
apotheosis : a set of emissaries are despatched among the
people, to cry up his piety, gravity, and love of raw flesh ;
the people take them at their word, approach the Lama,
now become an idol, with the most humble prostration ;
he receives their addresses without motion, commences a
god, and is ever after fed by his priests with the spoon of
immortality. The same receipt in this country serves to
make a great man. The idol only keeps close, sends out
his little emissaries to be hearty in his praise; and straight,
whether statesman or author, he is ^et down in the list of
<pb>
fame, continuing to be praised while it is fashionable to
praise, or while he prudently keeps his minuteness con-
cealed from the public.
I have visited many countries, and have been in cities
without number, yet never did I enter a town which could
not produce ten or twelve of those little great men; all
fancying themselves known to the rest of the world, and
complimenting each other upon their extensive reputation.
It is amusing enough when two of those domestic prodi-
gies of learning mount the stage of ceremony, and give
and take praise from each other. I have been present
when a German doctor, for having pronounced a panegyric
upon a certain monk, was thought the most ingenious man
in the world; till the monk soon after divided this repu-
tation by returning the compliment; ' by which means, they
both marched off with universal applause.1
The same degree of undeserved adulation that attends
our great man while living, often also follows him to the
tomb. It frequently happens that one of his little ad-
mirers sits down, big with the important subject, and is
delivered of the history of his life and writings. This
may properly be called the revolutions of a life between
the fireside and the easy chair. In this we learn the year
in which he was born, at what an early age he gave symp-
toms of uncommon genius and application, together with
some of his smart sayings, collected by his aunt and
mother while yet but a boy. The next book introduces
him to the university, where we are informed of his
amazing progress in learning, his excellent skill in darn-
ing stockings, and his new invention for papering books to
save the covers. He next makes his appearance in the
republic of letters, and publishes his folio. Now the
colossus is reared, his works are eagerly bought up by all
the purchasers of scarce books. The learned societies
invite him to become a member: he disputes against some
1-1 These words are not in the Public Ledger version. Compare the
remarks on " little great men " here with the portion of the article on
.Dunkin (' Criticisms' in our vol. iv.), commencing—" There is scarcely
a trifling city," &c., and containing the story of Brandellius and Mogu-
sius. The criticism was published six months before this Letter appeared
in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
foreigner with a long Latin name, conquers in the contro-
versy, is complimented by several authors of gravity and
importance, is excessively fond of egg-sauce with his pig,
becomes president of a literary club and dies in the meri-
dian of his glory. Happy they who thus have some little
faithful attendant, who never forsakes them, but prepares
to wrangle and to praise against every opposer; at once
ready to increase their pride while living, and their cha-
racter when dead ! For you and me, my friend, who have
no humble admirer thus to attend us—we, who neither
are, nor never will be, great men, and who do not much
care whether we are great men or no, at least let us
strive to be honest men, and to have common sense.
[Adieu.]
LETTEE LXXV.
To the Same.
THE NECESSITY OF AMUSING EACH OTHEB WITH NEW
BOOKS INSISTED UPON.1
THERE are numbers in this city who live by writing new
books; and yet there are thousands of volumes in every
large library unread and forgotten. This, upon my
arrival, was one of those contradictions which I was un-
able to account for. " Is it possible," said I, " that there
should be any demand for new books, before those already
published are read ? Can there be so many employed in
producing a commodity with which the market is already
overstocked—and with goods also better than any of
modern manufacture ? "
What, at first view, appeared an inconsistence, is a proof
at once of this people's wisdom and refinement. Even
allowing the works of their ancestors better written than
theirs, yet those of the moderns acquire a real value by
being marked with the impression of the times. Antiquity
has been in the possession of others; the present is our
1 Dated Sept. 17, 1760 in the Public Ledger.—So.
<pb>
I
own : let us first, therefore, learn to know what belongs to
ourselves, and then, if we have leisure; cast our reflections
back to the reign of Shonou, who governed twenty thou-
sand years before the creation of the moon.
The volumes of antiquity, like medals, may very well
serve to amuse the curious ; but the works of the moderns,
like the current coin of a kingdom, are much better for
immediate use: the former are often prized above their
intrinsic value, and kept with care ; the latter seldom pass
for more than they are worth, and are often subject to the
merciless hands of sweating critics and clipping com-
pilers : the works of antiquity were ever praised, those of
the moderns read : the treasures of our ancestors have our
esteem, and we boast the passion ; those of contemporary
genius engage our heart, although we blush to own it.
The visits we pay the former resemble those we pay the
great,—the ceremony is troublesome, and yet such as we
would not choose to forego ; our acquaintance with modern
books is like sitting with a friend,—our pride is not
flattered in the interview, but it gives more internal
satisfaction.1
In proportion as society refines, new books must ever
become more necessary. Savage rusticity is reclaimed by
oral admonition alone ; but the elegant excesses of refine-
ment are best corrected by the 'still voice of studious en-
quiry. In a polite age, almost every person becomes a
reader, and receives more instruction from the press than
the pulpit. The preaching bonze may instruct the illite-
rate peasant; but nothing less than the insinuating ad-
dress of a fine writer can win its way to a heart already
relaxed in all the effeminacy of refinement. Books are
necessary to correct the vices of the polite; but those vices
are ever changing, and the antidote should be changed
accordingly—2 should still be new.2
Instead, therefore, of thinking the number of new pub-
lications here too great, I could wish it still greater, as
they are the most useful instruments of reformation.
Every country must be instructed either by writers or I
1 This passage, commencing " The visits we pay," &c., is not in the
Ledger.—ED.
2-2 Not in the Public Ledger version.—ED.
<pb>
preachers; but as the number of readers increases, the
number of hearers is proportionably diminished—the
writer becomes more useful, and the preaching bonze less
necessary.
Instead, therefore, of complaining that writers are over-
paid, when their works procure them a bare subsistence, I
should imagine it the duty of a state, not only to en-
courage their numbers, but their industry. A bonze is
rewarded with immense riches for instructing only a few,
«ven of the most ignorant of the people ; and sure the poor
scholar should not beg his bread, who is capable of in-
structing a million.1
Of all rewards, I grant, the most pleasing to a man of
real merit is fame; but a polite age, of all times, is that in
which scarcely any share of merit can acquire it. What
numbers of fine writers in the latter empire of Rome,
when refinement was carried to the highest pitch, have
missed that fame and immortality which they had fondly
arrogated to themselves! How many Greek authors, who
wrote at that period when Constantinople was the refined
mistress of the empire, now rest, either not printed or not
read, in the libraries of Europe ! Those who came first,
while either state as yet was barbarous, carried all the re-
putation away. Authors, as the age refined, became more
numerous, and their numbers destroyed their fame.2 It is
but natural, therefore, for the writer, when conscious that
his works will not procure him fame hereafter, to endeavour
to make them turn out to his temporal interest here.
Whatever be the motives which induce men to write,
whether avarice or fame, the country becomes most wise
and happy, in which they most serve for instructors. The
countries where sacerdotal instruction alone is permitted,
remain in ignorance, superstition, and hopeless slavery.
1 The Ledger has " instructing a nation."—ED.
2 Goldsmith once observed to Boswell, that he himself " had come too
late into the world, for that Pope and other poets had taken up the
places in the Temple of Fame; so that as but a few at any period can
ress poetical reputation, a man of genius can now hardly acquire
JOHNSON. ' That is one of the most sensible things I ever heard of
Goldsmith. It is difficult to get literary fame, and it is every day grow-
ing more difficult.'"—Napier's edit. Boswell's ' Life,' 1884, 8vo. vol. ii.
p. 186.—ED.
<pb>
In England, where there are as many new books published
as in all the rest of Europe together, a spirit of freedom
and reason reigns among the people: they have been often
known to act like fools, they are generally found to think
like men.
The only danger that attends a multiplicity of publica-
tions is, that some of them may be calculated to injure
rather than benefit society. But where writers are nume-
rous, they also serve as a check upon each other; and,
perhaps, a literary inquisition is the most terrible punish-
ment that can be conceived, to a literary transgressor.
But, to do the English justice, there are but few of-
fenders of this kind; their publications, in general, aim
either at mending the heart, or improving the common
weal. The dullest writer talks of virtue, and liberty, and
benevolence, with esteem; tells his true story, filled with
good and wholesome advice ; warns against slavery, bribery,
or the bite of a mad dog ; and dresses up his little useful
magazine of knowledge and entertainment at least with a
good intention. The dunces of France, on the other hand,
who have less encouragement, are more vicious. Tender
hearts, languishing eyes, Leonora in love at thirteen,
ecstatic transports, stolen blisses, are the frivolous sub-
jects of their frivolous memoirs. In England, if a bawdy
blockhead1 thus breaks in on the community, he sets his
whole fraternity in a roar ; nor can he escape, even though
he should fly to nobility for shelter.
Thus, even dunces, my friend, may make themselves
useful. But there are others, whom nature has blest with
talents above the rest of mankind ; men capable of think-
ing with precision, and impressing their thought with
rapidity; beings who diffuse those regards upon mankind
which others contract and settle upon themselves. These
deserve every honour from that community of which they
are more peculiarly the children ; to such I would give my
heart, since to them I am indebted for its humanity! Adieu.
1 Mr. Forster (' Life of Goldsmith,' 1854, v. i., p. 283) thinks this is
aimed at Sterne. He classes it with Goldsmith's previous criticism of
' Tristram Shandy,' and with the later remarks in Dr. Johnson's pre-
sence, and thinks our author too severe upon Sterne. See antf, p.
199.—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE LXXVI.
From Hingpo, to Lien Chi Altangi, by the way of Moscow.
THE PREFERENCE OF GBACE TO BEAUTY: AN
ALLEGORY.
I STILL remain at Terki, where I have received that
money which was remitted here in order to release me
from captivity. My fair companion still improves in my
esteem; the more I know her mind, her beauty becomes
more poignant: she appears charming, even among the
daughters of Circassia.
Yet, were I to examine her beauty with the art of a sta-
tuary, I should find numbers here that far surpass her;
Nature has not granted her all the boasted Circassian re-
gularity of feature, and yet she greatly exceeds the fairest
of the country in the art of seizing the affections.
" Whence," have I often said to myself, " this resistless
magic that attends even moderate charms ? Though I
regard the beauties of the country with admiration, every
interview weakens the impression ; but the form of Zelis
grows upon my imagination—I never behold her without
an increase of tenderness and respect. Whence this injus-
tice of the mind, in preferring imperfect beauty to that
which Nature seems to have finished with care ? whence
the infatuation that he whom a comet could not amaze,
should be astonished at a meteor?" When reason was
thus fatigued to find an answer, my imagination pursued
the subject, and this was the result.
I fancied myself placed between two landscapes, this
called the Region of Beauty, and that the Valley of the
Graces; the one adorned with all that luxuriant nature
could bestow; the fruits of various climates adorned the
trees—the grove resounded with music—the gale breathed
perfume—every charm that could arise from symmetry
and exact distribution were here conspicuous,—the whole
offering a prospect of pleasure without end. The Valley
of the Graces, on the other haud, seemed by no means so
inviting; the streams and the groves appeared just as they
<pb>
usually do in frequented countries: no magnificent par-
terres, no concert in the grove, the rivulet was edged with
weeds, and the rook joined its voice to that of the nightin-
gale. All was simplicity and nature.
The most striking objects ever first allure the traveller.
I entered the Region of Beauty with increased curiosity,
and promised myself endless satisfaction in being intro-
duced to the presiding goddess. I perceived several
strangers, who entered with the same design; and what
surprised me not a little was to see several others hasten-
ing to leave this abode of seeming felicity.
After some fatigue, I had at last the honour of being
introduced to the goddess, who represented Beauty in per-
son. She was seated on a throne, at the foot of which
stood several strangers, lately introduced like me, all
regarding her form in ecstasy.
" Ah, what eyes ! what lips ! how clear her complexion !
how perfect her shape ! " At these exclamations, Beauty,
with downcast eyes, would endeavour to counterfeit mo-
desty, but soon again looking round as if to confirm every
spectator in his favourable sentiments: sometimes she
would attempt to allure us by smiles ; and at intervals
would bridle back, in order to inspire us with respect as
well as tenderness.
This ceremony lasted for some time, and had so much
employed our eyes that we had forgot all this while that
the goddess was silent. We soon, however, began to per-
ceive the defect. " What," said we, among each other,
" are we to have nothing but languishingairs, soft looks, and
inclinations of the head ? will the goddess only deign to
satisfy our eyes ?" Upon this, one of the company
stepped up to present her with some fruits he had gathered
by the way. She received the present most sweetly smil-
ing, and with one of the whitest hands in the world, but
still not a word escaped her lips.
I now found that my companions grew weary of their
homage; they went off one by one, and resolving not to
be left behind, I offered to go in my turn, when, just at
the door of the temple, I was called back by a female
whose name was Pride, and who seemed displeased at the
behaviour of the company. " Where are you hastening ?"
9
<pb>
said she to me with an angry air; " the goddess of Beauty
is here."—" I have been to visit her, Madam," replied I,
" and find her more beautiful even than report had made
her."—"And why then will you leave her?" added the
female.—" I have seen her long enough," returned I, " I
have got all her features by heart. Her eyes are still the
same. Her nose is a very fine one, but it is still just such
a nose now as it was half an hour ago: could she throw a
little more mind into her face, perhaps I should be for
wishing to have more of her company." " What signifies,"
replied my female, " whether she has a mind or not; has
she any occasion for a mind, so formed as she is by nature ?
If she had a common face, indeed, there might be some
reason for thinking to improve it; but when features are
already perfect, every alteration would but impair them.
A fine face is already at the point of perfection, and a fine
lady should endeavour to keep it so: the impression it
would receive from thought would but disturb its whole
economy."
To this speech I gave no reply, but made the best of
my way to the Valley of the Graces. Here I found all
those who before had been my companions in the Region
of Beauty, now upon the same errand.
As we entered the valley, the prospect insensibly seemed
to improve; we found every thing so natural, so domestic,
and pleasing, that our minds, which before were con-
gealed in admiration, now relaxed into gaiety and good-
humour. We had designed to pay our respects to the
presiding goddess, but she was nowhere to be found.
One of our companions asserted, that her temple lay to
the right; another to the left; a third insisted that it was
straight before us ; and a fourth, that we had left it be-
hind. In short, we found every thing familiar and charm-
ing, but could not determine where to seek for the Grace
in person.
In this agreeable incertitude we passed several hours,
and though very desirous of finding the goddess, by no
means impatient of the delay. Every part of the valley
presented some minute beauty, which, without offering
itself at once, stole upon the soul, and captivated us with
the charms of our retreat. Still, however, we continued
<pb>
to search, and might still have continued, had we not been
interrupted by a voice, which, though we could not see
from whence it came, addressed us in this manner:—" If
you would find the goddess of Grace,1 seek her not under
one form, for she assumes a thousand. Ever changing
under the eye of inspection,2 her variety, rather than her
figure, is pleasing. In contemplating her beauty, the eye
glides over every perfection with giddy delight, and capable
of fixing no where, is charmed with the whole.3 She is
now Contemplation with solemn look ; again Compassion
with humid eye ; she now sparkles with joy ; soon every
feature speaks distress ; her looks at times invite our ap-
proach, at others repress our presumption : the goddess
cannot be properly called beautiful * under any one of these
forms, but by combining them all she becomes irresistibly
pleasing." 5 Adieu.
 LETTEE LXXVII.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President of
the Ceremonial Academy at Pekin, in China.
THE BEHAVIOUR OF A SHOPKBEPER AND HIS
THE shops of London are as well furnished as those of
Pekin. Those of London have a picture hung at their
door,7 informing the passengers what they have to sell, as
those at Pekin have a board to assure the buyer that they
have no intentions to cheat him.8
1 The Public Ledger version has " goddess of the Graces."—ED.
2 The Ledger has " under the inspecting eye of the observer."—ED.
3 Vultus nimium lubricus aspici.—HOR.—GOLDSMITH.
* The Ledger reads " called Grace."—ED.
5 The Ledger version has " becomes irresistible."—ED.
« Dated Sept. 22, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—En.
7 The London shop signs began to be disused in 1766, when the prac-
tice of numbering houses commenced. See note to Letter II., p. 16.—ED.
8 Sir John Davis says (' Chinese,' 1836, vol. ii., p. 9): " By the side
of each shop is suspended from on high a huge ornamental label of wood,
varnished and gilded, on which are inscribed the particular calling of the
III. U
<pb>
I was this morning to buy silk for a nightcap: immedi-
ately upon entering the mercer's shop, the master and his
two men, with wigs plastered with powder, appeared to
ask my commands. They were certainly the civilest people
alive; if I but looked, they flew to the place where I cast
my eye ; every motion of mine sent them running round
the whole shop for my satisfaction. I informed them
that I wanted what was good, and they showed me not less
than forty pieces, and each was better than the former,
the prettiest pattern in nature, and the fittest in the world
for nightcaps. " My very good friend," said I to the
mercer, " you must not pretend to instruct me in silks;
I know these in particular to be no better than your mere
flimsy Bungees."—" That may be," cried the mercer, who,
I afterwards found, had never contradicted a man in his
life ; " I can't pretend to say but they may; but I can
assure you, my Lady Trail has had a sacque from this piece
this very morning."—" But friend," said I, " though my
lady has chosen a sacque from it, I see no necessity that I
should wear it for a nightcap."—" That may be," returned
he again," yet what becomes a pretty lady, will at any
time look well on a handsome gentleman." This short
compliment was thrown in so very seasonably upon my
ugly face, that even though I disliked the silk, I desired
him to cut me off the pattern of a nightcap.
While this business was consigned to his journeymen,
the master himself took down some pieces of silk still
finer than any I had yet seen, and spreading them before
me, " There," cries he, " there's beauty ; my Lord Snake-
skin has bespoke the fellow to this for the birth-night' this
very morning ; it would look charmingly in waistcoats."
tenant, and the goods in which he deals The inscriptions in the
shops are sometimes amusing, and at the same time highly characteristic
of the keenness and industry of the people as traders. We have seen
the following :—' Gossiping and long sitting injure business.' ' Goods
genuine, prices true.' ' Former customers have inspired caution—no
credit given.'"—JED.
:- The phrases " the birth-night" and " the birth-day," often occurring
in writers of this time, such as Horace Walpole, Miss Burney, and Bos-
well, have reference to the birth-day of the King (Geo. II., b. 30 Oct.;
Geo. III., b. June 4th) and the balls and parties which were given on
that anniversary in court and fashionable circles.—ED.
<pb>
291
—" But I don't want a waistcoat," replied I. " Not want
a waistcoat! " returned the mercer, " then I would advise
you to buy one; when waistcoats are wanted, you may
depend upon it they will come dear. Always buy before
you want, and you are sure to be well used, as they say in
Cheapside." There was so much justice in his advice, that
I could not refuse taking it; besides, the silk, which was
really a good one, increased the temptation; so I gave
orders for that too.
As I was waiting to have my bargains measured and
cut, which, I know not how, they executed but slowly,
during the interval the mercer entertained me with the
modern manner of some of the nobility receiving company
in their morning gowns ; " Perhaps, Sir," adds he, " you
have a mind to see what kind of silk is universally worn."
Without waiting for my reply, he spreads a piece before
me, which might be reckoned beautiful even in China.
" If the nobility," continues he, " were to know I sold this
to any under a Eight Honourable, I should certainly lose
their custom ; you see, my Lord, it is at once rich, tasty,
and quite the thing."—" I am no Lord," interrupted I.—
" I beg pardon," cried he ; " but be pleased to remember,
when you intend buying a morning gown, that you had an
offer from me of something worth money. Conscience,
Sir, conscience is my way of dealing; you may buy a
morning gown now, or you may stay till they become
dearer and less fashionable ; but it is not my business to
advise." In short, most reverend Fum, he persuaded me
to buy a morning gown also, and would probably have
persuaded me to have bought half the goods in his shop,
if I had stayed long enough, or was furnished with suf-
ficient money.
Upon returning home, I could not help reflecting, with
some astonishment, how this very man, with such a con-
fined education and capacity, was yet capable of turning
me as he thought proper, and moulding me to his incli-
nations ! I knew he was only answering his own pur-
poses, even while he attempted to appear solicitous about
mine: yet, by a voluntary infatuation, a sort of passion
compounded of vanity and good-nature. I walked into the
snare with my eyes open, and put myself to future pain
"
<pb>
in order to give him immediate pleasure. The . wisdom
of the ignorant somewhat resembles the instinct of ani-
mals ; it is diffused in but a very narrow sphere, but
within that circle it acts with vigour, uniformity, and suc-
cess. Adieu.
LETTEE LXXVIII.
To the Same.
THE FRENCH RIDICULED AFTER THEIR OWN MANNER.
FROM my former accounts, you may be apt to fancy
the English the most ridiculous people under the sun.
They are indeed ridiculous; yet every other nation in
Europe is equally so; each laughs at each, and the Asiatic
at all.
I may, upon another occasion, point out what is most
strikingly absurd in other countries; I shall at present
confine myself only to France. The first national peculi-
arity a traveller meets upon entering that kingdom, is an
odd sort of staring vivacity in every eye, not excepting
even the children; the people, it seems, have got it into
their heads, that they have more wit than others, and so
stare, in order to look smart.
I know not how it happens, but there appears a sickly
delicacy in the faces of their finest women. This may
have introduced the use of paint, and paint produces
wrinkles; so that a fine lady shall look like a hag at
twenty-three. But as, in some measure, they never appear
young, so it may be equally asserted, that they actually
think themselves never old; a gentle Miss shall prepare
for new conquests at sixty, shall hobble a rigadoon when
she can scarce walk out without a crutch; she shall affect
the girl, play her fan and her eyes, and talk of sentiments,
bleeding hearts, and expiring for love, when actually dying
with age. Like a departing philosopher, she attempts
to make her last moments the most brilliant of her life.
Their civility to strangers is what they are chiefly
proud of ; and, to confess sincerely, their beggars are the
very politest beggars I ever knew : in other places a tra-
<pb>
veller is addressed with, a piteous whine, or a sturdy
solemnity, but a French beggar shall ask your charity with
a very genteel bow, and thank you for it with a smile and
a shrug.
Another instance of this people's breeding I must not
forget. An Englishman would not speak his native
language in a company of foreigners, where he was sure
that none understood him; a travelling Hottentot him-
self would be silent if acquainted only with the lan-
guage of his country; but a Frenchman shall talk to
you whether you understand his language or not; never
troubling his head whether you have learned French, still
he keeps up the conversation, fixes his eye full in your
face, and asks a thousand questions, which he answers
himself, for want of a more satisfactory reply.
But their civility to foreigners is not half so great as
their admiration of themselves. Every thing that belongs
to them and their nation is great, magnificent beyond ex-
pression, quite romantic ! every garden is a paradise, every
hovel a palace, and every woman an angel. They shut
their eyes close, throw their mouths wide open, and cry
out in a rapture, " Sacre! what beauty! O del! what
taste! Mart de ma vie! what grandeur! was ever any
people like ourselves ? we are the nation of men, and all
the rest no better than two-legged barbarians."
I fancy the French would make the best cooks in the
world if they had but meat; as it is, they can dress you
out five different dishes from a nettle-top, seven from a
dock-leaf, and twice as many from a frog's haunches;
these eat prettily enough when one is a little used to them,
are easy of digestion, and seldom overload the stomach
with crudities. They seldom dine under seven hot dishes :
it is true, indeed, with all this magnificence, they seldom
spread a cloth before the guests; but in that I cannot be
angry with them, since those who have got no linen on
their backs, may very well be excused for wanting it on
their tables.
Even religion itself loses its solemnity among them.
TJpon their roads, at about every five miles distance, you
see an image of the Virgin Mary, dressed up in grim head-
clothes, painted cheeks, and an old red petticoat; before
<pb>
her a lamp is often kept burning, at which, with the
saint's permission, I have frequently lighted my pipe.
Instead of the Virgin, you are sometimes presented with
a crucifix, at other times with a wooden Saviour, fitted out
in complete garniture, with sponge, spear, nails, pincers,
hammer, bees-wax, and vinegar-bottle. Some of those
images, I have been told, came down from heaven; if so,
in heaven they have but bungling workmen.
In passing through their towns, you frequently see the
men sitting at the doors knitting stockings, while the care
of cultivating the ground and pruning the vines falls to
the women. This is, perhaps, the reason why the fair sex
are granted some peculiar privileges in this country ; par-
ticularly, when they can get horses, of riding without a
side-saddle.
But I begin to think you may find this description pert
and dull enough; perhaps it is so; yet, in general, it is
the manner in which the French usually describe foreigners;
and it is but just to force a part of that ridicule back
upon them, which they attempt to lavish on others.
Adieu.
LETTBE LXXIX.
To the Same.
THE PREPARATIONS OF BOTH THEATRES,1 FOR A WINTER
CAMPAIGN.2
THE two theatres which serve to amuse the citizens
here, are again opened for the winter. The mimetic troops,
1 Drury Lane and Covent Garden. The "war" between the
two theatres at this juncture is thus stated in Dibdin's ' History of the
Stage,' vol. v., p. 128 : "At this time Beard, one of the best English
singers that ever was heard, who had married the daughter of Rich, the
proprietor of Covent Garden, stepped pretty forward in the musical
management of that theatre. This circumstance induced Garrick, in
September, 1760, to oppose Lowe and Mrs. Vincent as Macheath and
Polly, in the ' Beggars' Opera,' to Beard and Miss Brent. The contest,
however, operated greatly against Drury Lane. Beard, at the head of
his phalanx, was irresistible; and certainly at no period has the real
excellence and true character of English music been so well understood,
or so highly relished."—ED.
2 This Letter is daled Sept. 30, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
different from those of the state, begin their campaign
when all the others quit the field ; and, at a time when
the Europeans cease to destroy each other in reality, they
are entertained with mock battles upon the stage.
The dancing master once more shakes his quivering feet;
the carpenter prepares his paradise of pasteboard; the
hero resolves to cover his forehead with brass, and the
heroine begins to scour up her copper tail,1 preparative to
future operations; in short, all are in motion, from the
theatrical letter carrier in yellow clothes, to Alexander the
Great that stands on a stool.
Both houses have already commenced hostilities. War,
open war, and no quarter received or given ! Two singing
women,2 like heralds, have begun the contest; the whole
1 Perhaps in allusion to an ornament corresponding with that called
the fobng-hoanq, and described as worn by the Chinese ladies. See
Letter XXXIX ; also LXXXI, and the end of CV.—ED.
2 Mrs. Vincent and Miss Brent, mentioned in the last note but one.
Churchill in his ' Kosciad,'published in the following March, thus alludus
to the rival Follies :—
" Lo ! Vincent comes—with simple grace arrayed,
She laughs at paltry arts, and scorns parade.
Nature through her is by reflection shown,
Whilst Gay once more knows Polly for his own.
Talk not to me of diffidence and fear—
I see it all, but must forgive it here.
Defects like these which modest terrors cause,
From impudence itself extort applause,
Candour and reason still take virtue's part;
We love e'en foibles in so good a heart.
Let Tommy Arne, with usual pomp of style,
Whose chief, whose only merit's to compile,
« * * *
Publish proposals, laws for taste prescribe,
And chaunt the praise of an Italian tribe;
Let him reverse kind Nature's first decrees,
And teach e'en Brent a method not to please;
But never shall a truly British stage
Bear a vile race of eunuchs on the stage,
The boasted work's call'd national in vain,
If one Italian voice pollutes the strain.
Where tyrants rule, and slaves with joy obey,
Let slavish minstrels pour th' enervate lay,
To Britons far more noble pleasures spring,
In native notes whilst Beard and Vincent sing."
See also Letter LXXXV, and an essay on Vincent and Brent in our
vol. iv.—Ei\
<pb>
town is divided on this solemn occasion; one has the finest
pipe, the other the finest manner; one curtsies to the
ground, the other salutes the audience with a smile; one
comes on with modesty which asks, the other with bold-
ness which extorts applause ; one wears powder, the other
has none; one has the longest waist, but the other appears
most easy: all, all is important and serious ; the town as
yet perseveres in its neutrality ; a cause of such moment
demands the most mature deliberation ; they continue to
exhibit, and it is very possible this contest may continue
to please to the end of the season.
But the generals of either army have, as I am told, several
reinforcements to lend occasional assistance. If they
produce a pair of diamond buckles at one house, we have
a pair of eyebrows that can match them at the other. If
we outdo them in our attitude, they can overcome us by a
shrug ; if we can bring more children on the stage, they
can bring more guards in red clothes, who strut and
shoulder their swords to the astonishment of every
spectator.
They tell me here, that people frequent the theatre in
order to be instructed as well as amused. I smile to hear
the assertion. If I ever go to one of their playhouses,
what with trumpets, hallooing behind the stage, and bawl-
ing upon it, I am quite dizzy before the performance is
over. If I enter the house with any sentiments in my
head, I am sure to have none going away, the whole mind
being filled with a dead march, a funeral procession, a cat-
call, a jig, or a tempest.
There is, perhaps, nothing more easyl than to write pro-
perly for the English theatre; 21 am amazed that none are
apprenticed to the trade.2 The author, when well acquainted
with the value of thunder and lightning ; when versed in
all the mystery of scene-shifting and trap-doors; when
skilled in the proper periods to introduce a wire-walker
or a waterfall; when instructed in every actor's peculiar
talent, and capable of adapting his speeches to the sup-
1 The Public Ledger version has " nothing more difficult." In adopt-
ing the word "easy" the author, of course, becomes ironical.—ED.
"-2 In lieu of this sentence the Public Ledger has " one must be bound
'prentice to it."—ED.
<pb>
 posed excellence ; when thus instructed, he knows all that
can give a modern audience pleasure. One player shines
in an exclamation, another in a groan, a third in a horror,
a fourth in a start, a fifth in a smile, a sixth faints, and a
seventh fidgets round the stage with peculiar vivacity;
that piece, therefore, will succeed best, where each has a
proper opportunity of shining: the actor's business is not
so much to adapt himself to the poet, as the poet's to
adapt himself to the actor.
The great secret, therefore, of tragedy writing, at present,
is a perfect acquaintance with theatrical" ah "' s and " oh "' s;
a certain number of these, interspersed with " gods!" " tor-
tures!" "racks!" and "damnation!" shall distort every
actor almost into convulsions, and draw tears from every
spectator; a proper use of these will infallibly fill the whole
house with applause. l But, above all, a whining scene
must strike most forcibly. I would advise, from my pre-
sent knowledge of the audience, the two favourite players
of the town to introduce a scene of this sort in every play.
Towards the middle of the last act, I would have them
enter with wild looks and outspread arms : there is no
necessity for speaking, they are only to groan at each
other; they must vary the tones of exclamation and de-
spair through the whole theatrical gamut, wring their
figures into every shape of distress, and, when their cala-
mities have drawn a proper quantity of tears from the
sympathetic spectators, they may go off in dumb solemnity
at different doors, clasping their hands, or slapping their
pocket-holes: this, which may be called a tragic panto-
mime, will answer every purpose of moving the passions
as well as words could have done, and it must save those
expenses which go to reward an author.1
All modern plays that would keep the audience alive,
must be conceived in this manner; and, indeed, many a
modern play is made up on no other plan. This is the
merit that lifts up the heart, like opium, into a rapture of
insensibility, and can dismiss the mind from all the fatigue
of thinking: this is the eloquence that shines in many
a long forgotten scene, which has been reckoned exces-
 l-1 This passage is an addition to the version as given in the Ledger,
and was perhaps specially written for the ' Citizen.'—ED.
"
<pb>
sive fine upon acting; this the lightning that flashes no
less in the hyperbolical1 tyrant, who breakfasts on the wind,
than in little Norval, as harmless as the babe unborn.
Adieu.'
LETTER LXXX.
To the Same.
THE EVIL TENDENCY OF INCREASING PENAL LAWS, OB
ENFORCING EVEN THOSE ALREADY IN BEING WITH
I HAVE always regarded the spirit of mercy which ap-
pears in the Chinese laws with admiration. An order for
the execution of a criminal is carried from court by slow
journeys of six miles a-day, but a pardon is sent down
with the most rapid despatch. If five sons of the same
father be guilty of the same offence, one of them is for-
given, iu order to continue the family, and comfort his
aged parents in their decline.
Similar to this, there is a spirit of mercy breathes through
the laws of England, which some erroneously endeavour
to suppress ; the laws, however, seem unwilling to punish
the offender, or to furnish the officers of justice with every
means of acting with severity. Those who arrest debtors
are denied the use of arms ; the nightly watch is permitted
to repress the disorders of the drunken citizens only with
clubs; Justice, in such a case, seems to hide her terrors,
and permits some offenders to escape rather than load
any with a punishment disproportioned to the crime.
Thus it is the glory of an Englishman, that he is not
only governed by laws, but that these are also tempered
by mercy ; a country restrained by severe laws, and those,
too, executed with severity, (as in Japan,) is under the
most terrible species of tyranny ; a royal tyrant is generally
dreadful to the great, but numerous penal laws grind every
1 The Ledger has " Hyperboocary," which, however, is probably a
misprint.—ED.
2 Dated Oct. 3, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
rank of people, and chiefly those least able to resist
oppression,—the poor.
It is very possible thus for a people to become slaves to
laws of their own enacting, as the Athenians were to those
of Draco. " It might first happen," says the historian,
" that men with peculiar talents for villainy attempted to
evade the ordinances already established ; their practices,
therefore, soon brought on a new law levelled against
them ; but the same degree of cunning which had taught
the knave to evade the former statutes, taught him to
evade the latter also ; he flew to new shifts, while Justice
pursued with new ordinances; still, however, he kept his
proper distance, and whenever one crime was judged
penal by the state, he left committing it, in order to prac-
tise some unforbidden species of villainy. Thus the crimi-
nal against whom the threatenings were denounced always
escaped free, while the simple rogue alone felt the rigour
of justice. In the meantime, penal laws became nume-
rous ; almost every person in the state, unknowingly,
at different times offended, and was every moment subject
to a malicious prosecution." In fact, penal laws, in-
stead of preventing crimes, are generally enacted after
the commission; instead of repressing the growth of in-
genious villainy, only multiply deceit, by putting it upon
new shifts and expedients of practising with impunity.
Such laws, therefore, resemble the guards which are
sometimes imposed upon tributary princes, apparently,
indeed, to secure them from danger, but, in reality, to con-
firm their captivity.
Penal laws, it must be allowed, secure property in a
state, but they also diminish personal security in the same
proportion : there is no positive law, how equitable soever,
that may not be sometimes capable of injustice. 1 When
a law enacted to make theft punishable with death hap-
pens to be equitably executed, it can at best only guard
our possessions ; but when, by favour or ignorance, jus-
tice pronounces a wrong verdict, it then attacks our lives,
since, in such a case, the whole community suffers with
the innocent victim :' if, therefore, in order to secure the
1-1 This passage is not in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
effects of one man, I should make a law which should
take away the life of another, in such a case, to attain a
smaller good, I am guilty of a greater evil; to secure
society in the possession of a bauble, I render a real and
valuable possession precarious. And indeed the expe-
rience of every age may serve to vindicate the assertion.
No law could be more just than that called lesce majestatis,
when Rome was governed by emperors. It was but
reasonable, that every conspiracy against the administra-
tion should be detected and punished : yet what terrible
slaughters succeeded in consequence of its enacting ! pro-
scriptions, stranglings, poisonings, in almost every family
of distinction ; yet all done in a legal way, every criminal
had his trial, and lost his life by a majority of witnesses.
And such will ever be the case, where punishments are
numerous, and where a weak, vicious, but, above all, where
a mercenary magistrate is concerned in their execution :
such a man desires to see penal laws increased, since he
too frequently has it in his power to turn them into in-
struments of extortion; in such hands, the more laws,
the wider means, not of satisfying justice, but of satiating
avarice.
A mercenary magistrate, who is rewarded in proportion,
not to his integrity, but to the number he convicts, must
be a person of the most unblemished character, or he will
lean on the side of cruelty; and when once the work of
injustice is begun, it is impossible to tell how far it will
proceed. It is said of the hyaena, that, naturally, it is no
way ravenous, but when once it has tasted human flesh,
it becomes the most voracious animal of the forest, and
continues to persecute mankind ever after.1 A corrupt
magistrate may be considered as a human hysena : he
begins, perhaps, by a private snap; he goes on to a morsel
among friends; he proceeds to a meal in public ; from a
meal he advances to a surfeit; and at last sucks blood like
a vampyre.
1 This is one of those idle inventions with which naturalists eke out
their description of animals with whose habits they are imperfectly
acquainted. Of the hyaena, in particular, many absurd stories have
been told.—B. [When Goldsmith came to write his ' Animated Nature,'
1766-74, he seems to have rejected this error.—ED.]
<pb>
Not in such hands should the administration of justice
be entrusted, but to those who know how to reward as
well as to punish. It was a fine saying of Nangfu the
Emperor, who, being told that his enemies had raised an
insurrection in one of the distant provinces, " Come,
then, my friends," said he, " follow me, and I promise
you that we shall quickly destroy them." He marched
forward, and the rebels submitted upon his approach.
All now thought that he would take the most signal re-
venge, but were surprised to see the captives treated with
mildness and humanity. " How ! " cries his first minister,
" is this the manner in which you fulfil your promise ?
your royal word was given that your enemies should be
destroyed, and behold you have pardoned all, and even
caressed some ! "—." I promised," replied the Emperor,
with a generous air, " to destroy my enemies; I have ful-
filled my word, for see they are enemies no longer; I
have made/newcZs of them."
This, could it always succeed, were the true method
of destroying the enemies of a state; well it were, if re-
wards and mercy alone could regulate the commonwealth :
but since punishments are sometimes necessary, let them
at least be rendered terrible, by being executed but sel-
dom ; and let Justice lift her sword rather to terrify than
revenge.1 Adieu.
 1 The spirit and tendency of this letter is highly creditable to Gold-
smith, and it was greatly in advance of the time. Nearly half a century
elapsed before Sir Samuel Romilly was enabled to overcome public preju-
dice, and to commence the reform of the criminal laws; and some of his
most valuable measures were not carried until they had been four or five
times rejected by the legislature.—KNIGHT. [This letter may be read
with Letter L. on ' English Liberty.' The latter, by-the-by, was printed
as a tract, with the heading ' The English Constitution,' and circulated
(about 1792-1800) avowedly in opposition to the writings of "Tom
Payne," the author of' The Age of Reason,' &c.—ED.]
<pb>
LETTEE LXXXI.
To the Same.
THE LADIES' TBAINS
I HAVE as yet given you but a short and imperfect de-
scription of the ladies of England. Woman, my friend,
is a subject not easily understood, even in China ; what,
therefore, can be expected from my knowledge of the sex
in a country where they are universally allowed to be
riddles, and I but a stranger ?
To confess a truth, I was afraid to begin the descrip-
tion, lest the sex should undergo some new revolution be-
fore it was finished, and my picture should thus become
old before it could well be said to have ever been new.
To-day they are lifted upon stilts ; to-morrow they lower
their heels, and raise their heads ; their clothes at one
time are bloated out with whalebone ; at present they have
laid their hoops aside, and are become as slim as mer-
maids. All, all is in a state of continual fluctuation,
from the mandarine's wife who rattles through the streets
in her chariot, to the humble sempstress who clatters over
the pavement in iron-shod pattens.
What chiefly distinguishes the sex at present is the train.
As a lady's quality or fashion was once determined here
by the circumference of her hoop, both are now measured
by the length of her tail. Women of moderate fortunes
are contented with tails moderately long ; but ladies of
true taste and distinction set no bounds to their ambition
in this particular. I am told the Lady Mayoress, on days
of ceremony, carries one longer than a bell-wether of
Bantam, whose tail, you know, is trundled along in a
wheel-barrow.
Sun of China, what contradictions do we find in this
strange world ! not only the people of different countries
think in opposition to each other, but the inhabitants of
a single island are often found inconsistent with them-
1 Dated Oct. 6, 1760, in the Public Ledger.— En.
<pb>
selves. Would you believe it ? this very people, my
Fum, who are so fond of seeing their women with long
tails, at the same time dock their horses to the very
rumpl! ! !
But you may easily guess, that I am no ways displeased
with a fashion which tends to increase a demand for the
commodities of the East, and is so very beneficial to the
country in which I was born. Nothing can be better cal-
culated to increase the price of silk than the present
manner of dressing. A lady's train is not bought but
at some expense, and after it has swept the public walks
for a very few evenings, is fit to be worn no longer:
more silk must be bought in order to repair the breach,
and some ladies of peculiar economy are thus found to
patch up their tails eight or ten times in a season. This
unnecessary consumption may introduce poverty here, but
then we shall be the richer for it in China.
The man in black, who is a professed enemy to this
manner of ornamenting the tail, assures me, there are
numberless inconveniences attending it, and that a lady
dressed up to the fashion is as much a cripple as any in
Nankin. But his chief indignation is levelled at those
who dress in this manner without a proper fortune to sup-
port it. He assures me, that he has known some who
would have a tail though they wanted a petticoat; and
others, who, without any other pretensions, fancied they
became ladies, merely from the addition of three super-
fluous yards of ragged silk:—" I know a thrifty good
woman," continues he, " who thinking herself obliged to
carry a train like her betters, never walks from home
without the uneasy apprehension of wearing it out too
soon : every excursion she makes, gives her new anxiety ;
and her train is every bit as importunate, and wounds her
peace as much as the bladder we sometimes see tied to the
tail of a cat."
Nay, he ventures to affirm, that a train may often bring
a lady into the most critical circumstances : " for, should
a rude fellow," says he, " offer to come up to ravish a kiss,
and the lady attempt to avoid it, in retiring she must
1 The Public Ledger version has " very bone."—ED.
<pb>
necessarily tread upon her train, and thus fall fairly upon
her back ; by which means, every one knows,—her clothes
may be spoiled." 1
The ladies here make no scruple to laugh at the small-
ness of a Chinese slipper, but I fancy our wives at China
would have a more real cause of laughter, could they but
see the immoderate length of a European train. Head of
Confucius! to view a human being crippling herself with
a great unwieldy tail for our diversion! Backward she
cannot go, forward she must move but slowly; and if ever
she attempts to turn round, it must be in a circle not
smaller than that described by the wheeling crocodile,
when it would face an assailant. And yet to think that
all this confers importance and majesty ! to think that a
lady acquires additional respect from fifteen yards of
trailing taffety ! I cannot contain—ha! ha ! ha! this is
certainly a remnant of European barbarity: the female
Tartar, dressed in sheep skins, is in far more convenient
drapery.2 Their own writers have sometimes inveighed
against the absurdity of this fashion, but perhaps it has
never been ridiculed so well as upon the Italian theatre,
where Pasquariello being engaged to attend on the
Countess of Fernambroco, having one of his hands employed
in carrying her muff, and the other her lap-dog, he bears
her train majestically along, by sticking it in the waist-
band of his breeches! Adieu.
1 The Public Ledger has the following additional paragraph: " But to
be less serious, I have never seen a country where the ladies did not
render themselves ridiculous, by a mistaken idea of elegance and beauty;
your nose-borers, eyebrow-pluckers, and tooth stainers, give us no very
high opinions of humanity, yet how are they more absurd than the train-
makers of Europe, or the feet-swathers of China ? "—ED.
2 The Ledger has " is far more at her ease."—ED.
<pb>
LETTER LXXXII.
To the Same.
THE SCIENCES USEFUL IN A POPULOUS STATE PREJU-
DICIAL IN A BARBAROUS ONE.1
A DISPUTE has for some time divided the philosophers of
Europe: it is debated whether arts and sciences are more
serviceable or prejudicial to mankind? They who main-
tain the cause of literature, endeavour to prove their use-
fulness, from the impossibility of a large number of men
subsisting in a small tract of country without them;
from the pleasure which attends the acquisition; and
from the influence of knowledge in promoting practical
morality.
They who maintain the opposite opinion, display the
happiness and Innocence of those uncultivated nations who
live without learning; urge the numerous vices which are
to be found only in polished society ; enlarge upon the
oppression, the cruelty, and the blood which must neces-
sarily be shed, in order to cement civil society ; and insist
upon the happy equality of conditions in a barbarous
state, preferable to the unnatural subordination of a more
refined constitution.2
This dispute, which has already given so much employ-
ment to speculative indolence, has been managed with
much ardour, and (not to suppress our sentiments) with
but little sagacity. They who insist that the sciences are
useful in refined society, are certainly right, and they who
maintain that barbarous nations are more happy without
them, are right also ; but when one side, for this reason,
attempts to prove them as universally useful to the solitary
barbarian as to the native of a crowded commonwealth;
1 The date of this letter in the Public Ledger is Oct. 10, 1760.—ED.
2 This is the paradox which J. J. Rousseau has so eloquently main-
tained in his ' Discours sur 1'origine et le^"fondements de 1'ine'galite
parmi les homines.'—B. [In his ' Memoirs of Voltaire' (in our vol. iv.)
Goldsmith refers to that writer's ' La Defense du Mondain' as pursuing
much the same argument as that of the above letter.—ED.]
III. X
<pb>
or when the other endeavours to banish them as prejudicial
to all society, even from populous states as well as from
the inhabitants of the wilderness, they are both wrong ;
since that knowledge which makes the happiness of a
refined European, would be a torment to the precarious
tenant of an Asiatic wild.1
Let me, to prove this, transport the imagination for a
moment to the midst of a forest in Siberia. There we be-
hold the inhabitant, poor indeed, but equally fond of
happiness with the most refined philosopher of China,
The earth lies uncultivated and uninhabited for miles
around him; his little family and he the sole and undis-
puted possessors. In such circumstances, nature and
reason will induce him to prefer a hunter's life to that of
cultivating the earth. He will certainly adhere to that
manner of living which is carried on at the smallest
expense of labour, and that food which is most agreeable
to the appetite; he will prefer indolent, though precarious,
luxury, to a laborious, though permanent, competence;
and a knowledge of his own happiness will determine him
to persevere in native barbarity.
In like manner, his happiness will incline him to bind
himself by no law: laws are made in order to secure
present property; but he is possessed of no property
which he is afraid to lose, and desires no more than will
be sufficient to sustain him; to enter into compacts with
others, would be undergoing a voluntary obligation with-
out the expectance of any reward. He and his country-
men are tenants, not rivals, in the same inexhaustible
forest; the increased possessions of one by no means
diminishes the expectations arising from equal assiduity
in another; there is no need of laws, therefore, to repress
ambition, where there can be no mischief attending its
most boundless gratifications.
Our solitary Siberian will, in like manner, find the
sciences not only entirely useless in directing his practice,
but disgusting even in speculation. In every contempla-
tion, our curiosity must be first excited by the appearances
of things, before our reason undergoes the fatigue of in-
' The Public Ledger has " to the wandering inhabitant of the forests
of Asia."—ED.
<pb>
vestigating the causes. Some of those appearances are
produced by experiment, others by minute enquiry ; some
arise from a knowledge of foreign climates, and others
from an intimate study of our own. But there are few
objects in comparison which present themselves to the
inhabitant of a barbarous country; the game he hunts, or
the transient cottage he builds, make up the chief objects
of his concern; his curiosity, therefore, must be propor-
tionably less; and if that is diminished, the reasoning
faculty will be diminished in proportion.
Besides, sensual enjoyment adds wings to curiosity.
We consider few objects with ardent attention, but those
which have some connection with our wishes, our plea-
sures, or our necessities. A desire of enjoyment first
interests our passions in the pursuit, points out the
object of investigation, and reason then comments where
sense has led the way. An increase in the number of our
enjoyments, therefore, necessarily produces an increase of
scientific research: but in countries where almost every
enjoyment is wanting, reason there seems destitute of its
great inspirer, and speculation is the business of fools
when it becomes its own reward.
The barbarous Siberian is too wise, therefore, to exhaust
his time in quest of knowledge, which neither curiosity
prompts nor pleasure impels him to pursue. When told
of the exact admeasurement of a degree upon the equator
at Quito, he feels no pleasure in the account; when in-
formed that such a discovery tends to promote navigation
and commerce, he finds himself no way interested in either.
A discovery which some have pursued at the hazard of
their lives, affects him with neither astonishment nor
pleasure. He is satisfied with thoroughly understanding
the few objects which contribute to his own felicity; he
knows the properest places where to lay the snare for the
sable, and discerns the value of furs with more than Euro-
pean sagacity. More extended knowledge would only
serve to render him unhappy ; it might lend a ray to show
him the misery of his situation, but could not guide him
in his efforts to avoid it. ' Ignorance is the happiness of
the poor.'
'-' Not in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
The misery of being endowed with sentiments above its
capacity of fruition,1 is most admirably described in one of
the fables of Locman, the Indian moralist.2 " An elephant
that had been peculiarly serviceable in fighting the battles
of Wistnow,3 was ordered by the god to wish for whatever
he thought proper, and the desire should be attended with
immediate gratification. The elephant thanked his bene-
factor on bended knees, and desired to be endowed with
the reason and faculties of a man. Wistnow was sorry
to hear the foolish request, and endeavoured to dissuade
him from his misplaced ambition; but finding it to no
purpose, gave him at last such a portion of wisdom, as
could correct even the Zendavesta of Zoroaster. The
reasoning elephant went away rejoicing in his new acqui-
sition ; and though his body still retained its ancient form,
he found his appetites and passions entirely altered. He
first considered, that it would not only be more comfort-
able, but also more becoming, to wear clothes; but, un-
happily he had no method of making them himself, nor
had he the use of speech to demand them from others;
and this was the first time he felt real anxiety. He soon
perceived how much more elegantly men were fed than he,
therefore he began to loath his usual food, and longed for
those delicacies which adorn the tables of princes; but
here again he found it impossible to be satisfied, for
though he could easily obtain flesh, yet he found it im-
possible to dress it in any degree of perfection. In short,
every pleasure that contributed to the felicity of mankind,
served only to render him more miserable, as he found
himself utterly deprived of the power of enjoyment. In
1 For " fruition " the Ledger has " enjoyment."—ED.
2 An Abyssinian philosopher of high repute among the eastern
nations. He obtained such credit for wisdom, that Mahomet has given
his name to a chapter of the Koran, in which he introduces God as say-
ing, " I have bestowed wisdom on Lokman." Many of his apophthegms
are scattered in the writings of the Orientals; an entertaining selection
from which will be found in D'Herbelot. The relics of his fables were
published at Leyden, in Arabic and Latin, in 1636, and translated into
French by Galland, at Paris, in 1714, and more recently by Marcel, in
1799.—PRIOR.
3 Wistnow, or rather Vishnu, the PRESERVER, in the Hindu mytho-
logy, is the personification of the Divine goodness. He is the son of
Isis, or Nature, and the brother of Brahma and Sereswati.—B.
<pb>
this manner he led a repining, discontented life, detesting
himself, and displeased with his ill-judged ambition ; till
at last his benefactor, Wistnow, taking compassion on his
forlorn situation, restored him to the ignorance and the
happiness which he was originally formed to enjoy."
No, my friend, to attempt to introduce the sciences into
a nation of wandering barbarians, is only to render them
more miserable than ever nature designed they should be.
A life of simplicity1 is best fitted to a state of solitude.
The great lawgiver of Russia attempted to improve the
desolate inhabitants of Siberia, by sending among them
some of the politest men of Europe. The consequence has
shown, that the country was as yet unfit to receive them ;
they languished for a time, with a sort of exotic malady ;
every day degenerated from themselves, and at last, instead
of rendering the country more polite, they conformed to
the soil, and put on barbarity.
No, my friend, in order to make the sciences useful in
any country, it must first become populous; the inhabi-
tant must go through the different stages of hunter, shep-
herd, and husbandman: then, when property becomes
valuable, and consequently gives cause for injustice ; then,
when laws are appointed to repress injury, and secure
possession, when men, by the sanction of those laws, be-
come possessed of superfluity, when luxury is thus intro-
duced, and demands its continual supply, then it is that
the sciences become necessary and useful; the state then
cannot subsist without them; they must then be introduced,
at once to teach men to draw the greatest possible quan-
tity of pleasure from circumscribed possession, and to
restrain them within the bounds of moderate enjoyment.
The sciences are not the cause of luxury, but its conse-
quence ; and this destroyer thus brings with it an antidote
which resists the virulence of its own poison. By asserting
that luxury introduces the sciences, we assert a truth ; but
if, with those who reject the utility of learning, we assert
that the sciences also introduce luxury, we shall be at
once false, absurd, and ridiculous. Adieu.
1 The Ledger has " A life of ignorance."—ED.
<pb>
LETTER LXXXIII.
From Lien Chi Altangi to Hingpo, by the way of Moscow.
SOME CAUTIONS ON LIFE, TAKEN FROM A MODERN
PHILOSOPHER OF CHINA.1
You are now arrived at an age, my son, when pleasure
dissuades from application ; but rob not, by present grati-
fication, all the succeeding period of life of its happiness.
Sacrifice a little pleasure at first to the expectance of
greater. The study of a few years will make the rest of
life completely easy.
But instead of continuing the subject myself, take the
following instructions, borrowed from a modern philo-
sopher of China.2 " He who has begun his fortune by
study, will certainly confirm it by perseverance. The love
of books damps the passion for pleasure ; and when this
passion is once extinguished,life is then cheaply supported:
thus a man being possessed of more than he wants, can
never be subject to great disappointments, and avoids all
those meannesses which indigence sometimes unavoidably
produces.
" There is unspeakable pleasure attending the life of a
voluntary student. The first time I read an excellent book,
it is to me just as if I had gained a new friend: when I
read over a book I have perused before, it resembles the
meeting with an old one. We ought to lay hold of every
incident in life for improvement, the trifling as well as the
important. It is not one diamond alone which gives
lustre to another ; a common coarse stone is also employed
for that purpose. Thus, I ought to draw advantage from,
the insults and contempt I meet with from a worthless
fellow. His brutality ought to induce me to self-exami-
1 Date in the Public Ledger, Oct. 15, 1760.—ED.
2 A translation of this passage may also be seen in Du Halde, vol. ii.,
fol., p. 47 and 58. This extract will at least serve to show that fondness
for humour which appears in the writings of the Chinese.—GOLD-
SMITH.
<pb>
nation, and correct every blemish that may have given rise
to his calumny.
" Yet with all the pleasures and profits which are gene-
rally produced by learning, parents often find it difficult
to induce their children to study. They often seem
dragged to what wears the appearance of application. Thus,
being dilatory in the beginning, all future hopes of emi-
nence are entirely cut off. If they find themselves obliged
to write two lines more polite than ordinary, their pencil
then seems as heavy as a mill-stone, and they spend ten
years in turning two or three periods with propriety.
" These persons are most at a loss when a banquet is
almost over; the plate and the dice go round, that the
number of little verses, which each is obliged to repeat,
may be determined by chance. The booby, when it comes
to his turn, appears quite stupid and insensible. The
company divert themselves with his confusion; and
sneers, winks, and whispers are circulated at his expense.
As for him, he opens a pair of large heavy eyes, stares at
all about him, and even offers to join in the laugh, without
ever considering himself as the burthen of all their good
humour.
" But it is of no importance to read much, except you
be regular in your reading. If it be interrupted for any
considerable time, it never can be attended with proper
improvement. There are some who study for one day with
intense application, and repose themselves for ten days
after. But wisdom is a coquette, and must be courted with
unabating assiduity.
" It was a saying of the ancients, that a man never
opens a book without reaping some advantage by it. I
say with them, that every book can serve to make us more
expert, except romances,1 and these are no better than in-
1 The sentiments here are very like Goldsmith's own on the same sub-
ject, in his letter to his brother, the Rev. Henry Goldsmith (1759), thus
(see our vol. i. p. 449): " Above all things let him [Henry's son] never
touch a romance or novel; these paint beauty in colours more charming
than nature, and describe happiness that man never tastes. How delu-
sive, how destructive, are those pictures of consummate bliss! They
teach the youthful mind to sigh after beauty and happiness which never
existed; to despise the little good which fortune has mixed in our cup,
by expecting more than she ever gave." Yet the above, it will be seen,
<pb>
struments of debauchery. They are dangerous fictions,
where love is the ruling passion.
" The most indecent strokes there pass for turns of
wit; intrigue and criminal liberties for gallantry and
politeness. Assignations, and even villainy, are put in
such strong lights, as may inspire even grown men with
the strongest passion ; how much more, therefore, ought
the youth of either sex to dread them, whose reason is
so weak, and whose hearts are so susceptible of passion ?
" To slip in by a back-door, or leap a wall, are accom-
plishments that, when handsomely set off, enchant a
young heart. It is true, the plot is commonly wound up
by a marriage, concluding with the consent of parents,
and adjusted by every ceremony prescribed by law. But,
as in the body of the work, there are many passages that
offend good morals, overthrow laudable customs, violate
the laws, and destroy the duties most essential to so-
ciety, virtue is thereby exposed to the most dangerous,
attacks.
" But, say some, the authors of these romances have
nothing in view, but to represent vice punished, and virtue
rewarded.1 Granted. But will the greater number of
readers take notice of these punishments and rewards ?
Are not their minds carried to something else ? Can it
be imagined that the heart2 with which the author inspires
the love of virtue, can overcome that crowd of thoughts
which sway them to licentiousness ? To be able to incul-
cate virtue by so leaky a vehicle, the author must be a
philosopher of the first rank. But in our age, we can find
but few first-rate philosophers.
purports to be a passage from a " modern philosopher of China," which
is also translated in Du Halde.—ED.
1 This looks almost as if the " modern philosopher of China" had had
the English Samuel Richardson in his " mind's eye." Knight's edition,
of the ' Citizen of the World' stands alone in printing the quotation
from the " modern philosopher of China " as ending three paragraphs back
—with " unabating assiduity "—which arrangement gives the remarks
about " romances " and " virtue rewarded " to Goldsmith, to whom they
really seem to belong; yet all the early editions, including the Ledger
edition, and all the later editions, save Knight's, have the quotation
marked as if coming down to the end of the letter.—ED.
2 The third edition and Percy have " heart;" but the first, the
Ledger, and several of the late editions, have " art."—Er>.
<pb>
" Avoid such performances where vice assumes the face
of virtue: seek wisdom and knowledge, without ever
thinking you have found them. A man is wise, while he
continues in the pursuit of wisdom; but when he once
fancies that he has found the object of his enquiry, he
then becomes a fool. Learn to pursue virtue from the man
that is blind, who never makes a step without first examin-
ing the ground with his staff.
" The world is like a vast sea; mankind like a vessel
sailing on its tempestuous bosom. Our prudence is its
sails, the sciences serve us for oars, good or bad fortune
are the favourable or contrary winds, and judgment is
the rudder ; without this last the vessel is tossed by every
billow, and will find shipwreck in every breeze. In a word,
obscurity and indigence are the parents of vigilance and
economy ; vigilance and economy, of riches and honour;
riches and honour, of pride and luxury ; pride and luxury,
of impurity and idleness ; and impurity and idleness again
produce indigence and obscurity. Such are the revolutions
of life." Adieu.
LETTER LXXXTV.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fwm Hoam, First
President of, &c.
THE ANECDOTES OF SEVERAL POETS, WHO LIVED AND
DIED IN CIRCUMSTANCES OF WRETCHEDNESS.1
I FANCY the character of a poet is in every country the
same: fond of enjoying the present, careless of the future ;
his conversation that of a man of sense, his actions those
of a fool; of fortitude able to stand unmoved at the burst-
ing of an earthquake, yet of sensibility to be affected by
the breaking of a tea-cup : Such is his character, which,
considered in every light, is the very opposite of that which
leads to riches.
The poets of the West are as remarkable for their indi-
1 Dated Oct. 17, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
'
<pb>
gence as their genius, and yet, among the numerous hos-
pitals designed to relieve the poor, I have heard of but
one erected for the benefit of decayed authors. This was
founded by Pope Urban VIIL, and called THE BETBEAT
OF THE INCURABLES, intimating, that it was equally im-
possible to reclaim the patients, who sued for reception,
from poverty or from poetry. To be sincere, were I to
send you an account of the lives of the western poets,
either ancient or modern, I fancy you would think me
employed in collecting materials for a history of human
wretchedness.
Homer is the first poet and beggar of note among the
ancients: he was blind, and sung his ballads about the
streets ; but it is observed, that his mouth was more fre-
quently filled with verses than with bread. Plautus, the
comic poet, was better off,—he had two trades ; he was a
poet for his diversion, and helped to turn a mill in order
to gain a livelihood. Terence was a slave ; and Boethius
died in a jail.
Among the Italians, Paulo Borghese, almost as good a
poet as Tasso, knew fourteen different trades, and yet
died because he could get employment in none. Tasso
himself, who had the most amiable character of all poets,
has often been obliged to borrow a crown from some
friend, in order to pay for a month's subsistence : he has
left us a pretty sonnet, addressed to his cat, in which he
begs the light of her eyes to write by, being too poor to
afford himself a candle. But Bentivoglio—poor Benti-
voglio!—chiefly demands our pity. His comedies will
last with the Italian language : he dissipated a noble for-
tune in acts of charity and benevolence ; but, falling into
misery in his old age, was refused to be admitted into a
hospital which he himself had erected.
In Spain, it is said, the great Cervantes died of hunger ;
and it is certain, that the famous Camoensl ended his days
in a hospital.
If we turn to France, we shall there find even stronger
1 In place of this name the Public Ledger has " Agrippa." Camoens1
grave is marked " Here lies Louis de Camoens: He excelled all the
poets of his time. He lived poor and miserable; and he died so,
MDLXXIX."—ED.
<pb>
 instances of the ingratitude of the public. Vaugelas, one
of the politest writers, and one of the honestest men of
his time, was surnamed the Owl, from his being obliged
to keep within all day, and venture out only by night,
through fear of his creditors. His last will is very re-
markable. After having bequeathed all his worldly sub-
stance to the discharging his debts, he goes on thus :
" But, as there still may remain some creditors unpaid,
even after all that I have shall be disposed of, in such a
case, it is my last will, that my body should be sold to the
surgeons to the best advantage, and that the purchase
should go to the discharging those debts which I owe to
society ;' so that if I could not, while living, at least when
dead, I may be useful." '
Cassander2 was one of the greatest geniuses of his time,
yet all his merit could not procure him a bare subsistence.
Being by degrees driven into a hatred of all mankind,
from the little pity he found amongst them, he even ven-
tured at last ungratefully to impute his calamities to
Providence. In his last agonies, when the priest entreated
him to rely on the justice of Heaven, and ask mercy from
him that made him,—" If God," replies he, " has shown
me no justice here, what reason have I to expect any from
him hereafter ? " But being answered, that a suspension
of justice was no argument that should induce us to
doubt of its reality,—" Let me entreat you," continued his
confessor, " by all that is dear, to be reconciled to God,
your father, your maker, and friend."—" No," replied the
exasperated wretch, " you know the manner in which he
left me to live ; and," pointing to the straw on which he
was stretched, " you see the manner in which he leaves me
to die !"
But the sufferings of the poet in other countries is
nothing when compared to his distresses here ; the names
of Spenser and Otway, Butler and Dryden, are every day
mentioned as a national reproach : some of them lived in
a state of precarious indigence, and others literally died of
hunger.
At present, the few poets of England no longer depend on
'-1 Not in the Public Ledger version.—ED.
2 Franfois Cassandre, who died in 1695.—ED.
<pb>
the great for subsistence; they have now no other patrons
but the public, and the public, collectively considered, is a
I good and a generous master. It is, indeed, too frequently
mistaken as to the merits of every candidate for favour; but,
to make amends, it is never mistaken long. A performance,
indeed, may be forced for a time into reputation, but,
destitute of real merit, it soon sinks ; time, the touchstone
of what is truly valuable, will soon discover the fraud, and
an author should never arrogate to himself any share of
success, till his works have been read at least ten years
with satisfaction.
A man of letters at present, whose works are valuable,
is perfectly sensible of their value. Every polite member
of the community, by buying what he writes, contributes
to reward him. The ridicule, therefore, of living in a
garret, might have been wit in the last age, but continues
such no longer, because no longer true. A writer of real
merit now may easily be rich, if his heart be set only on
fortune ; and for those who have no merit, it is but fit that
such should remain in merited obscurity. He may now
refuse an invitation to dinner, without fearing to incur
his patron's displeasure, or to starve by remaining at
home. He may now venture to appear in company with
just such clothes as other men generally wear, and talk
even to princes with all the conscious superiority of wisdom.
Though he cannot boast of fortune here, yet he can bravely
assert the dignity of independence. Adieu.
LETTER LXXXV.
To the Same.
THE TRIFLING SQUABBLES OF STAGE-PLAYERS RIDICULED.1
1 HAVE interested myself so long in all the concerns of
this people, that I am almost become an Englishman ; I
now begin to read with pleasure of their taking towns or
gaining battles, and secretly wish disappointment to all
the enemies of Britain. Yet still my regard to mankind
1 Dated Oct. 21, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
fills me with concern for their contentions. I could wish
to see the disturbances of Europe once more amicably
adjusted : I am an enemy to nothing in this good world
but war; I hate fighting between rival states; I hate it
between man and man; I hate fighting even between
women! '
I already informed you, that while Europe was at va-
riance, we were also threatened from the stage with an
irreconcilable opposition, and that our singing women were
resolved to sing at each other to the end of the season.2
0 my friend, those fears were just! They are not only
determined to sing at each other to the end of the season,
but, what is worse, to sing the same song; and, what is
still more insupportable, to make us pay for hearing.
If they be for war, for my part, I should advise them
to have a public congress, and there fairly squall at each
other. What signifies sounding the trumpet of defiance
at a distance, and calling in the town to fight their battles ?
1 would have them come boldly into one of the most open
and frequented streets, face to face, and there try their
skill in quavering.
However this may be, resolved I am that they shall not
touch one single piece of silver more of mine. Though I
have ears for music, thanks to Heaven, they are not alto-
gether ass's ears. What! Polly and the Pickpocket
to-night, Polly and the Pickpocket to-morrow night, and
Polly and the Pickpocket again !3 I want patience. I '11
1 The last sentence is explained by the recital which follows of the
war between Mrs. Vincent and Miss Brent.—ED.
2 In Letter LXXIX.—ED.
3 Polly and Captain Macheath, in Gay's ' Beggars' Opera.' See
Letter LXXIX. The same date of the Public Ledger has the fol-
lowing :—
"EPIGRAM.
" When Vincent, in Polly, so lovely appear'd,
So innocent, sweet, and serene,
Nor Newgate, nor hanging, nor fetters I fear'd;
Her presence gave joy to the scene :
" Ah .' who for so beauteous a charmer, thought I,
His freedom or life would not barter;
Whose pride is so great, but for Polly would sigh,
Although she's a Thief-Taker's Daughter ?
—Bo. H. H."
<pb>
hear no more. My soul is out of tune; all jarring dis-
cord and confusion. Best, rest, ye dear three clinking
shillings in my pocket's bottom; the music you make is
more harmonious to my spirit, than catgut, rosin, or all
the nightingales that ever chirruped in petticoats !l
But what raises my indignation to the greatest degree
is, that this piping does not only pester me on the stage,
but is my punishment in private conversation. What is
it to me, whether the " fine pipe" of the one, or the
" great manner " of the other, be preferable ? what care I,
if one has a better top or the other a nobler bottom ? how
am I concerned, if one sings from the stomach, or the
other sings with a snap ? Yet, paltry as these matters
are, they make a subject of debate wherever I go; and
this musical dispute, especially among the fair sex, almost
always ends in a very unmusical altercation.
Sure the spirit of contention is mixed with the very con-
stitution of the people ! divisions among the inhabitants
of other countries arise only from their higher concerns,
but subjects the most contemptible are made an affair of
party here; the spirit is carried even into their amusements.
The very ladies, whose duty should seem to allay the im-
petuosity of the opposite sex, become themselves party
champions, engage in the thickest of the fight, scold at
each other, and show their courage, even at the expense of
their lovers and their beauty.
There are even a numerous set of poets who help to
keep up the contention, and write for the stage. Mistake
me not; I do not mean pieces to be acted upon it, but
panegyrical verses on the performers,—for that is the most
universal method of writing for the stage at present. It
is the business of the stage poet, therefore, to watch the
appearance of every new player at his own house,2 and so
come out next day with a flaunting copy of newspaper
verses. In these, Nature and the actor may be set to run
races, the player always coming off victorious; or Nature
may mistake him for herself; or old Shakespear may put
on his winding-sheet, and pay him a visit; or the tuneful
1 The Ledger has " chirruped in buckram."—ED.
2 That is, at the theatre at which he, the player, is engaged.—ED.
<pb>
Nine may strike up their harps in his praise 5 or, should it
happen to be an actress, Venus, the beauteous queen of
love, and the naked Graces, are ever in waiting : the lady
must be herself a goddess bred and born; she must—but
you shall have a specimen of one of these poems, which
may convey a more precise idea:
ON SEEING MRS. * * PERFORM IN THE CHARACTER OF
.:-*:**
To you, bright fair, the Nine address their lays,
And tune my feeble voice to sing thy praise.
The heartfelt power of every charm divine,
Who can withstand their all commanding shine ?
See how she moves along with every grace,
While soul-brought tears steal down each shining face!
She speaks!—'tis rapture all, and nameless bliss !
Ye gods! what transport e'er compar'd to this ?
As when in Paphian groves the Queen of Love,
With fond complaint, address'd the list'ning Jove,
'Twas joy and endless blisses all around,
And rocks forgot their hardness at the sound.
Then first, at last, e'en Jove was taken in,
And felt her charms, without disguise, within.
And yet, think not, my friend, that I have any par-
ticular animosity against the champions who are at the
head of the present commotion ; on the contrary, I could
find pleasure in their music, if served up at proper inter-
vals ; if I heard it only on proper occasions, and not about
it wherever I go. In fact, I could patronize them both ;
and as an instance of my condescension in this particular,
they may come and give me a song at my lodgings, on any
evening when I am at leisure, provided they keep a be-
coming distance, and stand, while they continue to enter-
tain me, with decent humility, at the door.
You perceive I have not read the seventeen books of
Chinese ceremonies to no purpose. I know the proper
share of respect due to every rank of society. Stage-
players, fire-eaters, singing women, dancing dogs, wild
beasts, and wire-walkers, as their efforts are exerted for
our amusement, ought not entirely to be despised. The
laws of every country should allow them to play their
tricks at least with impunity. They should not be branded
with the ignominious appellation of vagabonds ; at least
they deserve a rank in society equal to the mystery of
<pb>
barbers, or undertakers, and, could my influence extend so
far, they should be allowed to earn even forty or fifty
pounds a-year, if eminent in their profession.
I am sensible, however, that you will censure me of pro-
fusion in this respect, bred up as you are in the narrow
prejudices of Eastern frugality. You will undoubtedly
assert, that such a stipend is too great for so useless an
employment.1 Yet how will your surprise increase, when
told, that though the law holds them as vagabonds, many
of them earn more than a thousand a-year ! You are
amazed ! There is cause for amazement. A vagabond
with a thousand a-year is indeed a curiosity in nature; a
wonder far surpassing the flying fish, petrified crab, or
travelling lobster. However, from my great love to the
profession, I would willingly have them divested of part of
their contempt, and part of their finery: the law should
kindly take them under the wing of protection ; fix them
into a corporation, like that of the barbers, and abridge
their ignominy and their pensions. As to their abilities in
other respects, I would leave that entirely to the public,
who are certainly in this case the properest judges—
whether they despise them or no.
Yes, my Fum, I would abridge their pensions. A
theatrical warrior, who conducts the battles of the stage,
should be cooped up with the same caution as a bantam
cock that is kept for fighting. When one of those animals
is taken from its native dunghill, we retrench it both in
the quantity of its food, and the number of its seraglio :
players should in the same manner be fed, not fattened ;
they should be permitted to get their bread, but not eat
the people's bread into the bargain ; and, instead of being
permitted to keep four mistresses, in conscience they
should be contented only with two.
Were stage-players thus brought into bounds, perhaps
we should find their admirers less sanguine, and conse-
quently less ridiculous, in patronizing them. We should
be no longer struck with the absurdity of seeing the same
1 Sir J. F. Davis says that in China stage players are considered in-
famous, and inadmissible to the office of mandarin, and that this infamy
and disability apply even to the children of actors for three generations.
See the note to Letter XXI.—ED.
<pb>
people, whose valour' makes such a figure abroad, apostro-
phizing in the praise 2of a bouncing blockhead,5 and
wrangling in the defence of a copper-tailed3 actress at
home.
I shall conclude my letter with the sensible admonition
of Me the philosopher: " You love harmony," says he,
." and are charmed with music. I do not blame you for
hearing a fine voice when you are in your closet, with a
lovely parterre under your eye, or in the night time, while
perhaps the moon diffuses her silver rays. But is a man
to carry this passion so far as to let a company of come-
dians, musicians, and singers, grow rich upon his ex-
hausted fortune ? If so, he resembles one of those dead
bodies, whose brains the embalmer has picked out through
its ears." * Adieu.
1 Here, apparently, we have an allusion to the patronage of the stage
by the military, and also to the scandals prevalent about this time in
.consequence of the disclosures at the courts-martial upon Admiral Byng,
Sir John Mordaunt (1757), and others. See the essay on ' English
Officers,' Sic., in the Appendix to this edition of the ' Citizen of the
World.'—ED.
2-2 Not in the Public Ledger version.—ED.
3 See the same term used in Letter LXXIX., p. 295. Long trains
being the fashion with the ladies at this time, perhaps " copper-tailed "
merely means a train resplendent with stage tinsel.—ED.
4 In reference to the above on the ' Beggars' Opera,' Mr. Forster
argues that Goldsmith was not, as has been stated, one of those who
ran down Gay's opera, and, later on, took part in the attempt to drive it
off the stage. (See Forster's ' Life,' 1854, vol. i., p. 290.) Goldsmith's
satire was no doubt directed rather at the excessive popularity of the
play than at its existence. It was in Sept., 1773, that Sir John Field-
ing and the other Westminster justices protested against the performance,
as calculated to create " an additional number of real thieves," and so
wrote to the managers of both Drury Lane and Covent Garden. Gar-
rick replied by an apparent agreement to suppress the piece in the
future; but Colman said that he differed in opinion from the magis-
trates, " thinking that the theatre is one of the few houses in the neigh-
bourhood that does not contribute to increase the number of thieves "
(Posthumous Letters, 1820, p. 194).—ED.
III.
<pb>
LETTER LXXXVI.
To the Same.
THE RACES OF NEWMARKET RIDICULED. DESCRIPTION OF
A CART RACE.1
Or all the places of amusement where gentlemen and
ladies are entertained, I have not been yet to visit New-
market.2 This, I am told, is a large field, where, upon
certain occasions, three or four horses are brought toge-
ther, then set a-running, and that horse which runs fastest
wins the wager.
This is reckoned a very polite and fashionable amuse-
ment here, much more followed by the nobility than par-
tridge fighting at Java, or paper kites in Madagascar.
Several of the great here, I am told, understand as much
of farriery as their grooms; and a horse, with any share
of merit, can never want a patron among the nobility.
We have a description of this entertainment almost
every day in some of the gazettes, as for instance: " On
such a day the Give and Take Plate was run for between
his Grace's Crab, his Lordship's Periwinkle, and 'Squire
Smackem's Slamerkin. All rode their Own horses. There
was the greatest concourse of nobility that has been
known here for several seasons. The odds were in favour
of Crab in the beginning; but Slamerkin, after the first
heat, seemed to have the match hollow: however, it was.
soon seen that Periwinkle improved in wind, which at last
turned out accordingly ; Crab was run to a stand still,
Slamerkin was knocked up, and Periwinkle was brought
in with universal applause." Thus, you see, Periwinkle
received universal applause,, and, no doubt, his lordship
came in for some share of that praise which was so libe-
1 Dated Oct. 24, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
1 Newmarket Kaces, dating back to James I. (who built a racing-
house on the spot) and earlier, had at this time an accession of popu-
larity, owing to the fact that the Jockey Club had become possessed
of the racing ground in 1753.—ED.
<pb>
rally bestowed upon Periwinkle. Sun of China ! how
glorious must the senator appear in his cap and leather
breeches, his whip crossed in his mouth, and thus coming
to the goal, amongst the shouts of grooms, jockeys, pimps,
stable-bred dukes, and degraded generals !
From the description of this princely amusement, now
transcribed, and from the great veneration I have for the
characters of its principal promoters, I make no doubt but
I shall look upon a horse-race with becoming reverence,
predisposed as I am by a similar amusement, of which I
have lately been a spectator; for just now I happened to
have an opportunity of being present at a cart race.
Whether this contention between three carts of different
parishes was promoted by a subscription among the nobi-
lity, or whether the grand jury, in council assembled, had
gloriously combined to encourage plaustral' merit, I can-
not take upon me to determine ; but certain it is, the
whole was conducted with the utmost regularity and
decorum, and the company, which made a brilliant ap-
pearance, were universally of opinion, that the sport was
high, 2the running fine, and the riders influenced by no
bribe.2
It was run on the road from London, to a village called
Brentford, between a turnip-cart, a dust-cart, and a dung-
cart ; each of the owners condescending to mount, and be
his own driver. The odds, at starting, were Dust against
Dung, five to four; but, after half a mile's going, the
knowing ones found themselves all on the wrong side, and
it was Turnip against the field, brass to silver.3
Soon, however, the contest became more doubtful;
Turnip indeed kept the way, but it was perceived that
Dung had better bottom. The road re-echoed with the
shouts of the spectators—" Dung against Turnip ! Turnip
1 This, and another in the same letter, patibidary [twenty-four lines
lower], are among the very few new words of Latin origin which he has
ventured to introduce—rather, we may believe, in mockery of the subject
discussed, than from any wish to give them permanent place in the lan-
guage. Few writers who have written so much, are more thoroughly
English in idiom than Goldsmith.—PKIOE.
2-2 Instead of this the Public Ledger has "and without any take
in."—ED.
3 The Ledger has " pence to half-pence."—ED.
<pb>
against Dung !" was now the universal cry ; neck and
neck; one rode lighter, but the other had more judg-
ment. I could not but particularly observe the ardour
with which the fair sex espoused the cause of the different
riders on this occasion; one was charmed with the un-
washed beauties of Dung; another was captivated with
the patibulary' aspect of Turnip; while, in the meantime,
unfortunate gloomy Dust, who came whipping behind,
was cheered by the encouragement of some, and pity
of all.
The contention now continued for some time, without a
possibility of determining to whom victory designed the
prize. The winning post appeared in view, and he who
drove the turnip-cart assured himself of success; and
successful he might have been, had his horse been as
ambitious as he ; but, upon approaching a turn from the
road, which led homewards, the horse fairly stood still,
and refused to move a foot farther. The dung-cart had
scarce time to enjoy this temporary triumph, when it was
pitched headlong into a ditch by the way-side, and the
rider left to wallow in congenial mud. Dust, in the
meantime, soon came up, and not being far from the post,
came in, amidst the shouts and acclamations of all the
spectators, and greatly caressed by all the quality of
Brentford. Fortune was kind only to one, who ought to
have been favourable to all; each had peculiar merit, each
laboured hard to earn the prize, and each richly deserved
the cart he drove.2
I do not know whether this description may not have
anticipated that which I intended giving of Newmarket.
I am told, there is little else to be seen even there. There
may be some minute differences in the dress of the spec-
tators, but none at all in their understandings : the quality
of Brentford are as remarkable for politeness and delicacy
as the breeders of Newmarket. The quality of Brentford
drive their own carts, and the honourable fraternity of
1 See note 1, on the previous page.—ED.
2 The humour of this expression is borrowed from Gay's parody on
Virgil's Et vituld tu digmts, et hie:—
" Forbear, contending louts, give o'er your strains,
An oaken staff each merits for his pains."—B.
<pb>
Newmarket ride their own horses. In short, the matches
in one place are as rational as those in the other; and
it is more than probable, that turnips, dust, and dung,
are all that can be found to furnish out description in
either.
Forgive me, my friend; but a person like me, bred up
in a philosophic seclusion, is apt to regard perhaps with
too much asperity, those occurrences which sink man below
his station in nature, and diminish the intrinsic value of
humanity.1 Adieu.
LETTEE LXXXVII.
From Fum Hoam, to Lien Chi Altangi.
THE FOLLY OF THE WESTERN PARTS OF EUROPE IN
You tell me the people of Europe are wise ; but where
lies their wisdom ? You say they are valiant too; yet I
have some reasons to doubt of their valour. They are
engaged in war among each other, yet apply to the Rus-
1 It would seem that our author did not merely invent the story of the
cart race, as a satire upon racing at Newmarket. In the Public Ledger
of Oct. 16, eight days previous to the appearance of this essay, there is
a letter signed " W. D.," and purporting to be by a Quaker, complaining
of cart races in the neighbourhood of Brentford. This letter is addressed
" To John F , the Magistrate" (no doubt Sir John Fielding is
meant), and the following is an extract:—" In my rides from Brentford
to the great city, which my business urges me to do twice or thrice a
week, I never fail meeting (and often at the peril of my life or limbs)
many of those brutes riding races on their carts, in open defiance of the
law and the magistrates; yea, verily, in the road before thine own
dwelling, and near unto the king's palace, did mine eyes lately behold a
threefold contention of these carmen, as regardless of the law, and as
ambitious to win the race, as the keenest of their fellow-racers are at
Newmarket."—ED.
2 Dated Oct. 31, 1760, in the Public Ledger. Mr. Knight in his
edition of 1840 appended the note—" This letter shows that the Russo-
phobia of our own political times is nearly a century old." Now, in
1884, it may, we fear, be said, that this same " Russo-phobia" is con-
siderably over a century old.—ED.
<pb>
sians, their neighbours and ours, for assistance. Cul-
tivating such an alliance, argues at once imprudence and
timidity. All subsidies paid for such an aid, is strengthen-
ing the Russians, already too powerful, and weakening the
employers, already exhausted by intestine commotions.
I cannot avoid beholding the Eussian empire as the
natural enemy of the more western parts of Europe ; as
an enemy already possessed of great strength, and, from
the nature of the government, every day threatening to
become more powerful. This extensive empire, which,
both in Europe and Asia, occupies almost a third of the
old world, was, about two centuries ago, divided into sepa-
rate kingdoms and dukedoms, and, from such a division,
consequently feeble. Since the times, however, of Johan
Basilides, it has increased in strength and extent; and
those untrodden forests, those innumerable savage ani-
mals, which formerly covered the face of the country, are
now removed, and colonies of mankind planted in their
room. A kingdom thus enjoying peace internally, pos-
sessed of an unbounded extent of dominion, and learning
the military art at the expense of others abroad, must
every day grow more powerful; and it is probable we shall
hear Eussia, in future times, as formerly, called the
Officina Gentium.
It was long the wish of Peter, their great monarch, to
have a fort in some of the western parts of Europe : many
of his schemes and treaties were directed to this end, but,
happily for Europe, he failed in them all. A fort in the
power of this people would be like the possession of a
floodgate; and whenever ambition, interest, or necessity
prompted, they might then be able to deluge the whole
western world with a barbarous inundation.
Believe me, my friend, I cannot sufficiently contemn the
politicians of Europe, who thus make this powerful people
arbitrators in their quarrel. The Eussians are now at
that period between refinement and barbarity, which
seems most adapted to military achievement; and if once
they happen to get footing in the western parts of
Europe, it is not the feeble efforts of the sons of effemi-
nacy and dissension that can serve to remove them. The
fertile valley and soft climate will ever be sufficient in-
<pb>
.ducements to draw whole myriads from their native
deserts, the trackless wild, or snowy mountain.
History, experience, reason, nature, expand the book of
wisdom before the eyes of mankind, but they will not
read. We have seen with terror a winged phalanx of
famished locusts, each singly contemptible, but from
multitude become hideous, cover like clouds the face of
day, and threaten the whole world with ruin. We have
.seen them settling on the fertile plains of India and
Egypt, destroying in an instant the labours and the hopes
of nations ; sparing neither the fruit of the earth nor the
verdure of the fields, and changing into a frightful desert,
landscapes of once luxuriant beauty. We have seen
myriads of ants issuing together from the southern
desert, like a torrent whose source was inexhaustible, suc-
ceeding each other without end, and renewing their de-
stroyed forces with unwearied perseverance, bringing
desolation wherever they came, banishing men and ani-
mals, and when destitute of all subsistence, in heaps in-
fecting the wilderness which they had made ! Like these
have been the migrations of men. When as yet savage,
and almost resembling their brute partners in the forest,
subject like them only to the instincts of nature, and
directed by hunger alone in the choice of an abode, how
have we seen whole armies starting wild at once from their
forests and their dens ; Goths, Huns, Vandals, Saracens,
Turks, Tartars, myriads of men, animals in human form,
without country, without name, without laws, out-powering
by numbers all opposition, ravaging cities, overturning
empires, and, after having destroyed whole nations, and
spread extensive desolation, how have we seen them sink
oppressed by some new enemy, more barbarous and even
more unknown than they ! Adieu.
<pb>
LETTEE LXXXVHI.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President, &c.
THE LADIES ADVISED TO GET HUSBANDS. A STORY TO
As the instruction of the fair sex in this country is
entirely committed to the care of foreigners ; as their
language-masters, music-masters, hair-frizzers, and go-
vernesses, are all from abroad, I had some intentions of
opening a female academy myself, and made no doubt, as-
I was quite a foreigner, of meeting a favourable reception.
In this I intended to instruct the ladies in all the con-
jugal mysteries; wives should be taught the art of
managing husbands, and maids the skill of properly
choosing them. I would teach a wife how far she might
venture to be sick, without giving disgust; she should be
acquainted with the great benefits of the cholic in the
stomach, and all the thorough-bred insolence of fashion.
Maids should learn the secret of nicely distinguishing every
competitor; they should be able to know the difference-
between a pedant and a scholar, a citizen and a prig, a
squire and his horse, a beau and his monkey; but chieflv,
they should be taught the art of managing their smiles,
from the contemptuous simper to the long laborious laugh.
But I have discontinued the project ; for what would
signify teaching ladies the manner of governing or choos-
ing husbands, when marriage is at present so much out
of fashion, that a lady is very well off who can get any
husband at all ? Celibacy now prevails in every rank of
life; the streets are crowded with old bachelors, and the
houses with ladies who have refused good offers, and are-
never likely to receive any for the future.
The only advice, therefore, I could give the fair sex, as
things stand at present, is to get husbands as fast as they
can. There is certainly nothing in the whole creation, not
even Babylon in ruins, more truly deplorable than a lady
1 Dated Nov. 14, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
in the virgin bloom of sixty-three, or a battered unmar-
ried beau, who squibs about from place to place, showing
his pigtail wig and his ears. The one appears to my
imagination in the form of a double nightcap, or a roll of
pomatum; the other in the shape of an electuary, or a box
of pills.
I would once more, therefore, advise the ladies to get
husbands. I would desire them not to discard an old
lover without very sufficient reasons, nor treat the new
with ill-nature till they know him false; let not prudes
allege the falseness of the sex, coquettes the pleasures of
long courtship, or parents the necessary preliminaries of
penny for penny. I have reasons that would silence even
a casuist in this particular. In the first place, therefore,
I divide the subject into fifteen heads, and then, sic argu-
mentor,—But, not to give you and myself the spleen, be
contented at present with an ' Indian tale:—
[THE MAN-FISH.]
IN a winding of the river Amidar, just before it falls
into the Caspian Sea, there lies an island unfrequented by
the inhabitants of the continent. In this seclusion, blest
with all that wild uncultivated nature could bestow, lived
a princess and her two daughters. She had been wrecked
upon the coast while her children as yet were infants,
who, of consequence, though grown up, were entirely unac-
quainted with man. Yet, inexperienced as the young ladies
were in the opposite sex, both early discovered symptoms,
the one of prudery, the other of being a coquette. The
eldest was ever learning maxims of wisdom and discre-
tion from her mamma, while the youngest employed all
her hours in gazing at her own face 2 in a neighbouring
fountain.2
1 The Ledger has " an improbable Indian tale." But the tale is pro-
bably as original and as English a " fairy tale " as Thackeray's ' The
Rose and the Ring.' The passage wherein the dowager Princess is said
to have been " called the Black-eyed Princess, from two black eyes she
had received in her youth, being a little addicted to boxing in her liquor"
sufficiently shows its nationality.—ED.
2-2 The Ledger text reads "in a muddy brook, which always reflects
better than a glassy stream."—ED.
<pb>
Their usual amusement in this solitude was fishing.
Their mother had taught them all the secrets of the art;
she showed them which were the most likely places to
throw out the line, what baits were most proper for the
various seasons, and the best manner to draw up the finny
prey, when they had hooked it. In this manner they spent
their time, easy and innocent, till one day, the Princess
being indisposed, desired them to go and catch her a stur-
geon or a shark for supper, which she fancied might sit
easy on her stomach. The daughters obeyed, and clapping
on a gold fish, the usual bait on those occasions, went and
sat upon one of the rocks, letting the gilded hook glide
down with the stream.
On the opposite shore, farther down, at the mouth of
the river, lived a diver for pearls, a youth who, by long
habit in his trade, was almost grown amphibious ; so that
he could remain whole hours at the bottom of the water,
without ever fetching breath. He happened to be at that
very instant diving when the ladies were fishing with the
gilded hook. Seeing therefore the bait, which to him had
the appearance of real gold, he was resolved to seize the
prize, but both his hands being already filled with pearl
oysters, he found himself obliged to snap at it with his
mouth. The consequence is easily imagined; the hook,
before unperceived, was instantly fastened in his jaw, nor
could he, with all his efforts, or his floundering, get free.
" Sister," cries the youngest Princess, "I have certainly
caught a monstrous fish ; I never perceived any thing
struggle so at the end of my line before ; come and help
me to draw it in." They both now, therefore, assisted in
fishing up the diver on shore ; but nothing could equal
their surprise on seeing him. " Bless my eyes ! " cries the
prude, " what have we got here ? this is a very odd fish to
be sure ; I never saw any thing in my life look so queer :
what eyes, what terrible claws, what a monstrous snout!
I have read of this monster somewhere before—it certainly
must be a tanlang, that eats women ; let us throw it back
again into the sea where we found it."
The diver, in the meantime, stood upon the beach at the
end of the line, with the hook in his mouth, using every
art that he thought could best excite pity, and particularly
<pb>
 looking extremely tender, which is usual in such circum-
stances. The coquette, therefore, in some measure in-
fluenced by the innocence of his looks, ventured to contra-
dict her companion. " Upon my word, sister," says she,
" I see nothing in the animal so very terrible as you are
pleased to apprehend; I think it may serve well enough
for a change. Always sharks, and sturgeons, and lobsters,
and crawfish, make me quite sick. I fancy a slice of this,
nicely grilled,1 and dressed up with shrimp sauce, would
be very pretty eating. 21 fancy mamma would like a bit
with pickles above all things in the world; and if it should
not sit easy on her stomach, it will be time enough to
discontinue it when found disagreeable, you know." 2
" Horrid!" cries the prude, "would the girl be poisoned?
I tell you it is a tanlang; I have read of it in twenty
places. It is everywhere described as being the most per-
nicious animal that ever infested the ocean. 3I am certain
it is the most insidious ravenous creature in the world,
and is certain destruction if taken internally."a The
youngest sister was now therefore obliged to submit: both
assisted in drawing the hook with some violence from the
diver's jaw ; and he, finding himself at liberty, beat his
breast against the broad wave, and disappeared in an
instant.
Just at this juncture the mother came down to the
beach, to know the cause of her daughters' delay ; they
told her every circumstance, describing the monster they
had caught. The old lady was one of the most discreet
women in the world; she was called the Black-eyed Prin-
cess, from two black eyes she had received in her youth,
being a little addicted to boxing in her liquor. " Alas,
my children," cries she, " what have you done ! the fish
you caught was a man-fish; one of the most tame
domestic animals in the world/ We could have let him
run and play about the garden, and he would have been
twenty times more entertaining than our squirrel or mon-
key."—"If that be all," says the young coquette, " we
will fish for him again. If that be all, I'll hold three
toothpicks to one pound of snuff, I catch him whenever I
1 For " nicely grilled " the Public Ledger has " barbacued."—ED.
2-2 and 3-3 These two passages are not in the Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
please." Accordingly they threw in their line once more ;
but with all their gilding, and paddling, and assiduity,
they could never after catch the diver. In this state of
solitude and disappointment, they continued for many
years, still fishing, but without success; till at last the
Genius of the place, in pity to their distresses, changed
the prude into a shrimp, and the coquette into an oyster.
Adieu.
LETTEE LXXXIX.
To the Same.
THE FOLLY OF REMOTE OR USELESS DISQUISITIONS
AMONG THE LEARNED.1
I AM amused, my dear Fum, with the labours of some
of the learned here. One shall write you a whole folio on
the dissection of a caterpillar. Another shall swell his
works with a description of the plumage on the wing of a,
butterfly ; a third shall see a little world on a peach leaf,
and publish a book to describe what his readers might see
more clearly in two minutes, only by being furnished with
eyes and a microscope.2
I have frequently compared the understandings of such
men to their own glasses.3 Their field of vision is too con-
tracted to take in the whole of any but minute objects ;
they view all nature bit by bit; now the proboscis, now
the atennse, now the pinnae of—a flea. Now the polypus
comes to breakfast upon a worm ; now it is kept up, to
see how long it will live without eating; now it is turned
inside outward ; and now it sickens and dies. Thus they
proceed, laborious in trifles, constant in experiment, with-
out one single abstraction, by which alone knowledge may
be properly said to increase ; till, at last, their ideas, ever
employed upon minute things, contract to the size of the
1 Dated Nov. 21, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
2 The Ledger has " proper glasses " for " a microscope."—ED.
3 The Ledger has " microscopes" for " glasses."—ED.
<pb>
diminutive object, and a single mite shall fill the whole
mind's capacity.
Yet believe me, my friend, ridiculous as these men are
to the world, they are set up as objects of esteem for each
other. They have particular places appointed for their
meetings ; in which one shows his cockle-shell, and is
praised by all the society ; another produces his powder,1
makes some experiments that result in nothing, and comes
off with admiration and applause ; a third comes out with
the important discovery of some new process in the
skeleton of a mole, and is set down as the accurate and
sensible; while one, still more fortunate than the rest, by
pickling, potting, and preserving monsters, rises into un-
bounded reputation.
The labours of such men, instead of being calculated to
amuse the public,2 are laid out only in diverting each other.
The world becomes very little the better or the wiser, for
knowing what is the peculiar food of an insect, that is
itself the food of another, which, in its turn, is eaten by a
third ; but there are men who have studied themselves
into a habit of investigating and admiring such minutis.
To these such subjects are pleasing, as there are some who
contentedly spend whole days in endeavouring to solve
enigmas, or disentangle the puzzling sticks of children.
But of all the learned, those who pretend to investigate
remote antiquity have least to plead in their own defence,
when they carry this passion to a faulty excess. They are
generally found to supply by conjecture the want of
record, and then, by perseverance, are wrought up into
a confidence of the truth of opinions, which, even to them-
selves, at first appeared founded only in imagination.
3 The Europeans have heard much of the kingdom of
China: its politeness, arts, commerce, laws, and morals,
are, however, but very imperfectly known among them.
They have even now in their Indian warehouse number-
less utensils, plants, minerals, and machines, of the use of
1 The Ledger text has " powder of Platina."—ED.
2 The Ledger has here in addition " (for to more than amusement such
cannot pretend)."—ED.
3 In the Ledger the paragraph commences " To give you au instance
of what I mean."—ED.
r
<pb>
which they are entirely ignorant; nor can any among
them even make a probable guess for what they might
have been designed. Yet, though this people be so igno-
rant of the present real state of China, the philosophers
I am describing have entered into long, learned, laborious
disputes about what China was two thousand years ago.
China and European happiness are but little connected
even at this day ; but European happiness, and China
two thousand years ago have certainly no connection at
all. However, the learned have written on and pursued
the subject through all the labyrinths of antiquity ; though
the early dews and the tainted gale be passed away, though
no footsteps remain to direct the doubtful chase, yet still
they run forward, open upon the uncertain scent, and
though, in fact, they follow nothing, are earnest in the
pursuit. In this chase, however, they all take different
ways. One, for example, confidently assures us, that
China was peopled by a colony from Egypt. Sesostris,
he observes, led his army as far as the Ganges; therefore,
if he went so far, he might still have gone as far as China,
which is but about a thousand miles from thence; there-
fore he did go to China ; therefore China was not peopled
before he went there ; therefore it was peopled by him.
Besides, the Egyptians have pyramids ; the Chinese have,
in like manner, their porcelain tower: the Egyptians used
to light up candles upon every rejoicing ; the Chinese have
lanterns upon the same occasion : the Egyptians had their
great river ; so have the Chinese. But what serves to put
the matter past a doubt is, that the ancient kings of China
and those of Egypt were called by the same names. The
Emperor Ki is certainly the same with King Atoes; for,
if we only change K into A, and i into toes, we shall have
the name Atoes: and, with equal ease, Menes may be
proved to be the same with the Emperor Yu; therefore
the Chinese are a colony from Egypt.
But another of the learned is entirely different from
the last; and he will have the Chinese to be a colony
planted by Noah, just after the Deluge. First, from the
vast similitude there is between the name of Fohi, the
founder of the Chinese monarchy, and that of Noah, the
preserver of the human race : Noah, Fohi,—very like each
<pb>
335
other truly ; they have each but four letters, and only two
of the four happen to differ. But, to strengthen the argu-
ment, Fohi, as the Chinese chronicle asserts, had no father.
Noah, it is true, had a father, as the European Bible tells
us ; but then, as this father was probably drowned in the
flood, it is just the same as if he had no father at all;
therefore Noah and Fohi are the same. Just after the
flood the earth was covered with mud; if it was covered
with mud, it must have been incrustated mud ; if it was
incrustated, it was clothed with verdure : this was a fine
unembarrassed road for Noah to fly from his wicked chil-
dren ; he therefore did fly from them, and took a journey
of two thousand miles for his own amusement; therefore
Noah and Fohi are the same.
Another sect of literati—for they all pass among the
vulgar for very great scholars—assert, that the Chinese
came neither from the colony of Sesostris nor from Noah,
but are descended from Magog, Meshec, and Tubal, and,
therefore, neither Sesostris, nor Noah, nor Fohi, are the
same.1
It is thus, my friend, that indolence assumes the airs of
wisdom, and, while it tosses the cup and ball with in-
fantine folly, desires the world to look on, and calls the
stupid pastime philosophy and learning. Adieu.
1 The Egyptian theory here satirized is supposed to be that of M. De
Guignes of the French Academy, a Professor, " Censor Royal and In-
terpreter of Oriental Languages to the King," &c., &c., who in 1759
published an essay to prove that the Chinese are an Egyptian colony, of
which an account was given in the Gentleman's Magazine of 1759
(p. 463). Concerning De Guigne's learned speculation, the Quarterly
Review of July, 1836, p. 493, has the following :—"That shrewd critic
and commentator on the writings of the Jesuits on China, M. Pauw,
exposed the supposition; and we entirely agree with Mr. Davis that
such an assumption is not supported by any testimony either direct or
circumstantial. In truth, there exists not the slightest shadow of resem-
blance between the Chinese written characters or symbols and the hiero-
glyphics of Egypt; and, we may add, neither do the physical charac-
teristics of colour, form, and features in the two races in the least accord
—whether we take the present Copts, the figures on the temples, or the
mummies in the tombs, to be the true representatives of the ancient
Egyptians." Mr. Davis here mentioned is Sir J. F. Davis, the author
of ' The Chinese/ so often quoted in our notes.—ED.
<pb>
LETTER XC.
To the Same.
THE ENGLISH SUBJECT TO THE SPLEEN.1
WHEN the men of this country are once turned of thirty
they regularly retire every year, at proper intervals, to lie
in of the spleen. The vulgar, unfurnished with the luxu-
rious comforts of the soft cushion, down bed, and easy
chair, are obliged, when the fit is on them, to nurse it up
by drinking, idleness, and ill-humour. In such disposi-
tions, unhappy is the foreigner who happens to cross
them; his long chin, tarnished coat, or pinched hat, are
sure to receive no quarter. If they meet no foreigner,
however, to fight with, they are, in such cases, generally
content with beating each other.
The rich, as they have more sensibility, are operated
upon with greater violence by this disorder. Different
from the poor, instead of becoming more insolent, they
grow totally unfit for opposition. A general here, who
would have faced a culverin when well, if the fit be on
him, shall hardly find courage to snuff a candle. An
admiral, who could have opposed a broadside without
shrinking, shall sit whole days in his chamber, mobbed
up in double nightcaps, shuddering at the intrusive breeze,
and distinguishable from his wife only by his black beard
and heavy eyebrows.
In the country, this disorder mostly attacks the fair sex;
in town, it is most unfavourable to the men. A lady, who
has pined whole years amidst cooing doves and complain-
ing nightingales, in rural retirement, shall resume all her
vivacity in one night at a city gaming-table; her husband,
who roared, hunted, and got drunk at home, shall grow
splenetic in town in proportion to his wife's good humour.
IJpon their arrival in London, they exchange their dis-
orders. In consequence of her parties and excursions, he
1 Dated Dec. 17, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
puts on the furred cap and scarlet stomacher, and perfectly
resembles an Indian husband,1 who, when his wife is safely
delivered, permits her to transact business abroad, while
he undergoes all the formality of keeping his bed, and re-
ceiving all the condolence in her place.
But those who reside constantly in town, owe this dis-
order mostly to the influence of the weather.2 It is im-
possible to describe what a variety of transmutations an
east wind shall produce; it has been known to change a
lady of fashion into a parlour couch ; an alderman into a
plate of custard; and a dispenser of justice into a rat-trap.
Even philosophers themselves are not exempt from its in-
fluence ; it has often converted 3 a poet into a coral and
bells, and a patriot senator into a dumb waiter.3
Some days ago I went to visit the man in black, and
entered his house with that cheerfulness which the cer-
tainty of a favourable reception always inspires. Upon
opening the door of his apartment, I found him with the
most rueful face imaginable, in a morning gown and
flannel nightcap, earnestly employed in learning to blow
the German flute. Struck with the absurdity of a man
in the decline of life thus blowing away all his constitu-
tion and spirits, even without the consolation of being
musical, I ventured to ask what could induce him to
1 The Ledger text has " an husband of Congo."—ED.
2 Sir William Temple says (Works, 1770, vol. iii. p. 426) :—"Our
country must be confessed to be, what a great foreign physician called it,
the region of spleen; which may arise a good deal from the great un-
certainty and many sudden changes of our weather in all seasons of the
year. And how much these affect the heads and hearts, especially of
the finest tempers, is hard to be believed by men whose thoughts are
not turned to such speculations."—ED.
3-3 In lieu of this passage the Public Ledger has " an algebraist into a
broker, and an anatomist into a city carver." These are effects of hypo-
chondriasis. Boswell, the biographer of Johnson, suffered from this com-
plaint. He describes it thus (Napier's 8vo. edition of the ' Life of John-
son,' vol. i. p. 37):—" It is a common effect of low spirits or melancholy,
to make those who are afflicted with it imagine that they are actually
suffering those evils which happen to be most strongly presented to their
minds. Some have fancied themselves to be deprived of the use of their
limbs, some to labour under acute diseases, others to be in extreme
poverty ; when in truth there was not the least reality in any of the sup-
positions ; so that when the vapours were dispelled, they were convinced
of the delusion."—ED.
III. Z
<pb>
attempt learning so difficult an instrument so late in
life ? To this he made no reply, but groaning, and still
holding the flute to his lips, continued to gaze at me for
some moments very angrily, and then proceeded to prac-
tise his gamut as before. After having produced a variety
of the most hideous tones in nature, at last turning to me,
he demanded, whether I did not think he had made a
surprising progress in two days ? " You see," continues
he, " I have got the ambusheer already; and as for finger-
ing, my master tells me, I shall have that in a few lessons
more." I was so much astonished with this instance of
inverted ambition, that I knew not what to reply, but soon
discerned the cause of all his absurdities: my friend was
under a metamorphosis by the power of spleen, and flute-
blowing was unluckily become his adventitious passion.
In order, therefore, to banish his anxiety imperceptibly,
by seeming to indulge it, I began to descant on those
gloomy topics by which philosophers often get rid of
their own spleen, by communicating it: the wretchedness
of a man in this life ; the happiness of some wrought out
of the miseries of others; the necessity that wretches
should expire under punishment, that rogues might enjoy
affluence in tranquillity: I led him on from the inhumanity
of the rich to the ingratitude of the beggar; from the in-
sincerity of refinement to the fierceness of rusticity ; and
at last had the good fortune to restore him to his usual
serenity of temper, by permitting him to expatiate upon
all the modes of human misery.1
" Some nights ago," says my friend, " sitting alone by
my fire, I happened to look into an account of the detec-
tion of a set of men called the thief-takers. I read over
the many hideous cruelties of those haters of mankind, of
their pretended friendship to wretches they meant to be-
tray, of their sending men out to rob, and then hanging
them. I could not avoid sometimes interrupting the
narrative, by crying out, ' Yet these are men!' As I went
on, I was informed that they had lived by this practice
- ' The Public Ledger text has here in addition, " Even at last he was
so far master of himself as to describe his own situation under the dis-
order in which I found him."—ED.
<pb>
339
several years, and had been enriched by the price of blood:
' And yet,' cried I,' I have been sent into this world, and
am desired to call these men my brothers !' I read, that
the very man who led the condemned wretch to the gallows,
was he who falsely swore his life away; ' and yet,' continued
I, ' that perjurer had just such a nose, such lips, such
hands, and such eyes, as Newton!' I at last came to the
account of the wretch that was searched after robbing one
of the thief-takers of half-a-crown. Those of the confede-
racy knew that he had got but that single half-crown in
the world ;' after a long search, therefore, which they knew
would be fruitless, and taking from him the half-crown,
which they knew was all he had, one of the gang compas-
sionately cried out, ' Alas ! poor creature, let him keep all
the rest he has got, it will do him service in Newgate,
where we are sending him.'2 This was an instance of such
complicated guilt and hypocrisy, that I threw down the
book in an agony of rage, and began to think with malice
of all the human kind. I sat silent for some minutes, and
soon perceiving the ticking of my watch beginning to grow
noisy and troublesome, I quickly placed it out of hearing,
and strove to resume my serenity. But the watchman
soon gave me a second alarm. I had scarcely recovered
from this, when my peace was assaulted by the wind at my
window; and when that ceased to blow, I listened for
death-watches in the wainscot. I now found my whole
system discomposed. I strove to find a resource in philo-
sophy and reason ; but what could I oppose, or where
direct my blow, when I could see no enemy to combat ? I
saw no misery approaching, nor knew any I had to fear, yet
still I was miserable. Morning came, I sought for tran-
quillity in dissipation, sauntered from one place of public
resort to another, but found myself disagreeable to my
acquaintance, and ridiculous to others.3 I tried at different
times dancing, fencing, and riding; I solved geometrical
problems, shaped tobacco-stoppers, wrote verses, and cut
1 The Ledger text has in addition, " yet pretended to believe that he
had more."—ED.
2 The Ledger has " where he is going."—ED.
3 The Ledger has " disagreeable to my friends, ridiculous to my
enemies."—ED.
<pb>
paper. At last I placed my affections on music, and find,
that earnest employment, if it cannot cure, at least will
palliate every anxiety." 1 Adieu.
LETTER XCI.
To the Same.
THE INFLUENCE OF CLIMATE AND SOIL UPON THE TEMPERS
AND DISPOSITIONS OF THE ENGLISH. [THE ENGLISH-
MAN.] 2
IT is no unpleasing contemplation, to consider the in-
fluence which soil and climate have upon the disposition of
the inhabitants, the animals, and vegetables, of different
countries. That among the brute creation is much more
visible than in man, and that in vegetables more than either.
In some places, those plants which are entirely poisonous
at home lose their deleterious quality by being carried
abroad:3 there are serpents in Macedonia so harmless as to
be used as playthings for children; and we are told, that in
some parts of Fez, there are lions so very timorous as to be
scared, though coming in herds, by the cries of women.
I know of no country where the influence of climate and
soil is more visible than in England; the same hidden cause
which gives courage to their dogs and cocks, gives also a
fierceness to their men. But chiefly this ferocity appears
among the vulgar. The polite of every country pretty
nearly resemble each other. But, as in simpling,4 it is
among the uncultivated productions of nature we are to
examine the characteristic differences of climate and soil, so
in an estimate of the genius of the people, we must look
1 Goldsmith played the flute, it will be remembered; and the man in
black is conjectured as being in part drawn from Goldsmith's self. See
notes ante, pp. 48, 98, 99,' Life,' &c.—ED.
2 Dated Nov. 17, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
3 Follows here in the Public Ledger " as in the Manzana Persica, for
instance. If we may credit Lucian."—ED.
4 The culling of herbs, &c.—Et>.
<pb>
among the sons of unpolished rusticity. The vulgar
English, therefore, may be easily distinguished from all
the rest of the world, by superior pride, impatience, and a
peculiar hardiness of soul.
Perhaps no qualities in the world are more susceptible of
a finer polish than these; artificial complaisance, and easy
deference, being superinduced over these, generally forms
a great character; something at once elegant and majestic,
affable, yet sincere. Such, in general, are the better sort;
but they who are left in primitive rudeness, are the least
disposed for society with others, or comfort internally, of
any people under the sun.
The poor, indeed, of every country, are but little prone to
treat each other with tenderness; their own miseries are too
apt to engross all their pity; and perhaps, too, they give
but little commiseration, as they find but little from others.
But, in England, the poor treat each other upon every
occasion with more than savage animosity, and as if they
were in a state of open war by nature. In China, if two
porters should meet in a narrow street, they would lay
down their burthens, make a thousand excuses to each other
for the accidental interruption, and beg pardon on their
knees; if two men of the same occupation should meet
here, they would first begin to scold, and at last to beat
each other. One would think they had miseries enough
resulting from penury and labour, not to increase them by
ill-nature among themselves, and subjection to new penal-
ties ; l but such considerations never weigh with them.1
But to recompense this strange absurdity, they are in
the main generous, brave, and enterprising. They feel the
slightest injuries with a degree of ungoverned impatience,
but resist the greatest calamities with surprising fortitude.
Those miseries under which any other people in the world
would sink, they have often showed they were capable of
enduring; if accidentally cast upon some desolate coast,
their perseverance is beyond what any other nation is capable
of sustaining; if imprisoned for crimes, their efforts to
escape are greater than among others. The peculiar
strength of their prisons, when compared to those else-
'-1 Not in the Public Ledger version.—ED.
<pb>
where, argues their hardiness; even the strongest prisons I
have ever seen in other countries, would be very insufficient
to confine the untameable spirit of an Englishman.1 In
short, what man dares do in circumstances of danger, an
Englishman will. 2 His virtues seem to sleep in the calm,
and are called out only to combat the kindred storm.2
But the greatest eulogy of this people is the generosity
of their miscreants; the tenderness, in general, of their
robbers and highwaymen. Perhaps no people can produce
instances of the same kind, where the desperate mix pity
with injustice; still show that they understand a distinc-
tion in crimes, and, even in acts of violence, have still some
tincture of remaining virtue. In every other country,
robbery and murder go almost always together; here, it
seldom happens, except upon ill-judged resistance or pur-
suit. The banditti of other countries are unmerciful to a
supreme degree; the highwayman and robber here are
generous, at least, in their intercourse among each other.
Taking, therefore, my opinion of the English from the vir-
tues and vices practised among the vulgar, they at once
present to a stranger all their faults, and keep their virtues
up only 3 for the enquiring eye of a philosopher.3
Foreigners are generally shocked at their insolence upon
first coming among them: they find themselves ridiculed
and insulted in every street; they meet with none of those
trifling civilities, so frequent elsewhere, which are instances
of mutual good-will, without previous acquaintance; they
travel through the country, either too ignorant or too
obstinate to cultivate a closer acquaintance ; meet every
moment something to excite their disgust, and return home
to characterize this as the region of spleen, insolence, and
ill-nature. In short, England would be the last place in
1 Compare with Goldsmith's other picture of the Englishman in ' The
Traveller,' published four years later. See Poems (vol. ii. p. 16).—ED.
2-2 Instead, the Public Ledger has " His virtues seem rather formed
for admiration than love." This is a sentiment rather opposed to that
expressed in the last two lines of the letter, though it is not so much
opposed to the famous,
" Stern o'er each bosom," &c.,
in ' The Traveller.'—ED.
3-3 The Ledger has instead.—" to the time of trial."—ED.
<pb>
the world I would travel to by way of amusement, but the
first for instruction. I would choose to have others for my
acquaintance, but Englishmen for my friends.
LETTER
To the Same.
THE MANNER IN WHICH SOME PHILOSOPHERS MAKE
THE mind is ever ingenious in making its own distress.
The wandering beggar, who has none to protect, to feed, or
to shelter him, fancies complete happiness in labour and a
full meal; take him from rags and want, feed, clothe, and
employ him, his wishes now rise one step above his station;
he could be happy were he possessed of raiment, food, and
ease. Suppose his wishes gratified even in these, his pros-
pects widen as he ascends; he finds himself in affluence and
tranquillity, indeed, but indolence soon breeds anxiety, and
he desires not only to be freed from pain, but to be pos-
sessed of pleasure : pleasure is granted him, and this but
opens his soul to ambition; and ambition will be sure to
taint his future happiness, either with jealousy, disappoint-
ment, or fatigue.
But of all the arts of distress found out by man for his
own torment, perhaps that of philosophic misery is most
truly ridiculous, a passion nowhere carried to so extrava-
gant an excess as in the country where I now reside. It is
not enough to engage all the compassion of a philosopher
here, that his own globe is harassed with wars, pestilence,
or barbarity, he shall grieve for the inhabitants of the
moon, if the situation of her imaginary mountains happen
to alter; and dread the extinction of the sun, if the spots
on his surface happen to increase. One should imagine,
that philosophy was introduced to make men happy; but
here it serves to make hundreds miserable.
1 Dated Dec. 3, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—-Eo.
<pb>
My landlady, some days ago, brought me the diary of a
philosopher of this desponding sort, who had lodged in the
apartment before me. It contains the history of a life
which seems to be one continued tissue of sorrow, appre-
hension, and distress. A single week will serve as a speci-
men of the whole :—
" MONDAY.—In what a transient decaying situation are
we placed; and what various reasons does philosophy
furnish to make mankind unhappy ! A single grain of
mustard shall continue to produce its similitude through
numberless successions ; yet what has been granted to this
little seed, has been denied to our planetary system; the
mustard seed is still unaltered, but the system is growing
old, and must quickly fall to decay. How terrible will it
be, when the motions of all the planets have at last become
so irregular as to need repairing ; when the moon shall fall
into frightful paroxysms of alteration; when the earth,
deviating from its ancient track, and with every other planet
forgetting its circular revolutions, shall become so eccentric,
that, unconfined by the laws of system, it shall fly off into
boundless space, to knock against some distant world, or
fall in upon the sun, either extinguishing his light, or burned
up by his flames in a moment! Perhaps, while I write, this
dreadful change is begun. Shield me from universal ruin!
Yet idiot man laughs, sings, and rejoices, in the very face
of the sun, and seems no way touched with his situation.
" TUESDAY.—Went to bed in great distress, awaked and
was comforted, by considering that this change was to
happen at some indefinite time; and therefore, like death,
the thoughts of it might easily be borne. But there is a
revolution, a fixed determined revolution, which must
certainly come to pass; yet which, by good fortune, I shall
never feel, except in my posterity. The obliquity of the
equator with the ecliptic, is now twenty minutes less than
when it was observed two thousand years ago by Piteas.1 If
this be the case, in six thousand the obliquity will be still
less by a whole degree. This being supposed, it is evident
that our earth, as Louville has clearly proved, has a motion,
by which the climates must necessarily change place, and
1 Pytheas was a celebrated mathematician and astronomer of Massilia.
He is supposed to have lived contemporary with Aristotle.—Eb.
<pb>
in the space of about one million of years, England shall
actually travel to the Antarctic pole. I shudder at the
change ! How shall our unhappy grandchildren endure the
hideous climate ! A million of years will soon be accom-
plished ; they are but a moment when compared to eternity;
then shall our charming country, as I may say, in a
moment of time, resemble the hideous wilderness of Nova
Zembla!1
" WEDNESDAY.—To-night, by my calculation, the long
predicted comet is to make its first appearance.2 Heavens!
what terrors are impending over our little dim speck of
earth! Dreadful visitation ! Are we to be scorched in its
fires, or only smothered in the vapour of its tail ? That is
the question! Thoughtless mortals, go build houses, plant
orchards, purchase estates, for to-morrow you die. But
what if the comet should not come ? That would be equally
fatal. Comets are servants which periodically return to
supply the sun with fuel. If our sun, therefore, should be
disappointed of the expected supply, and all his fuel be in
the meantime burnt out, he must expire like an exhausted
taper. What a miserable situation must our earth be in
without his enlivening rays! Have we not seen several
neighbouring suns entirely disappear ? Has not a fixed star,
near the tail of the Eam, lately been quite extinguished ?3
" THUBSDAY.—The comet has not yet appeared; I am
sorry for it: first, sorry because my calculation is false ;
secondly, sorry lest the sun should want fuel; thirdly,
sorry lest the wits should laugh at our erroneous predic-
tions ; and, fourthly, sorry because, if it appears to-night,
it must necessarily come within the sphere of the earth's
attraction; and Heaven help the unhappy country on
which it happens to fall!
1 The Ledger has in addition, " My portion of the earth here is but
small, however, I could wish to leave it to my posterity without being
subject to such dreadful vicissitudes."—ED.
2 The whole of this paper, but especially all that relates to the comet,
is closely imitated from Swift's account of the fears and disquietudes to
which the inhabitants of Laputa are subject. See 'Gulliver's Travels,'
part iii., chap. ii.—B. [Goldsmith also used some of the ideas of this
letter in drawing the character of Croaker in his ' Good-Katured
Man' (1768), see scene 1 (vol. ii. pp. 153-156).—ED.]
3 The Ledger has in addition, " in the same manner ? £)n either
side the prospect is fearful, I'll try to forget it in sleep."—ED.
<pb>
" FRIDAY.—Our whole society have been out, all eager in
search of the comet. We have seen not less than sixteen
comets in different parts of the heavens.1 However, we are
unanimously resolved to fix upon one only to be the comet
expected. 2 That near Virgo wants nothing but a tail to fit
it out completely for terrestrial admiration.2
" SATURDAY.—The moon is, I find, at her old pranks.
Her appulses, librations, and other irregularities, indeed,
amaze me. My daughter, too, is this morning gone off
with a grenadier. No way surprising; I was never able
to give her a relish for wisdom. She ever promised to be
a mere expletive in the creation. But the moon, the moon
gives me real uneasiness ; I fondly fancied I had fixed her.
I had thought her constant, and constant only to me ; but
every night discovers her infidelity, and proves me a deso-
late and abandoned lover." Adieu.
LETTEE XCIII.
To the Same.
THE FONDNESS OF SOME TO ADMIRE THE WRITINGS
OF LORDS, ETC.3
IT is surprising what an influence titles shall have upon
the mind, even though these titles be of our own making.
Like children, we dress up the puppets in finery, and then
stand in astonishment at the plastic wonder. I have been
told of a rat-catcher here, who strolled for a long time
about the villages near town, without finding any employ-
ment ; at last, however, he thought proper to take the title
of His Majesty's Eat-catcher in Ordinary, and this suc-
ceeded beyond his expectations. When it was known that
1 The Ledger adds, " Sixteen is rather too many."—ED.
*.* Instead of this the Ledger has, "I have observed the moon of
late to be very irregular. She shall be watched to-night with more
than usual assiduity."—ED.
3 Dated Jan. 7, 1761, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
he caught rats at court, all were ready to give him counte-
nance and employment.
But of all the people, they who make books seem most
perfectly sensible of the advantages of titular dignity. All
seem convinced, that a book written by vulgar hands can
neither instruct nor improve ; none but kings, chains, and
mandarines, can write with any probability of success. If
the titles inform me right, not only kings and courtiers, but
emperors themselves, in this country, periodically supply
the press.1
A man here who should write, and honestly confess that
he wrote for bread, might as well send his manuscript to
fire the baker's oven ; not one creature will read him : all
must be court-bred poets, or pretend, at least, to be court-
bred, who can expect to please. Should the caitiff fairly
avow a design of emptying our pockets and filling his own,
every reader would instantly forsake him ; even those who
write for bread themselves would combine to worry him,
perfectly sensible that his attempts only served to take the
bread out of their mouths.
And yet this silly prepossession the more amazes me,
when I consider, that almost all the excellent productions
in wit that have appeared here, were purely the offspring
of necessity ; their Drydens, Butlers, Otways, and Far-
quhars, were all writers for bread. Believe me, my friend,
hunger has a most amazing faculty of sharpening the
genius; and he who, with a full belly, can think like a
hero, after a course of fasting, shall rise to the sublimity
of a demi-god.
But what will most amaze is, that this very set of men,
who are now so much depreciated by fools, are, however, the
very best writers they have among them at present. For
my own part, were I to buy a hat, I would not have it from
a stocking-maker, but a hatter; were I to buy shoes, I
should not go to the tailor's for that purpose. It is just so
1 The success of Goldsmith's own ' History of England in a series of
Letters from a Nobleman to his Son' points the remarks in this letter.
Published anonymously in 1764, this work met with a large sale, simply
owing to its being attributed to diiferent noblemen, Lord Chesterfield
among them. See the account of this work, with its Preface, &c., in our
vol. iv.—ED.
<pb>
with regard to wit: did I, for my life desire to be well
served, I would apply only to those who made it their trade,
and lived by it. You smile at the oddity of my opinion ;
but, be assured, my friend, that wit is, in some measure,
mechanical; and that a man, long habituated to catch at
even, its resemblance, will at last be happy enough to
possess the substance. By a long habit of writing he
acquires a justness of thinking, and a mastery of manner,
which holyday writers, even with ten times his genius, may
vainly attempt to equal.
How, then, are they deceived who expect, from title,
dignity, and exterior circumstance, an excellence, which is
in some measure acquired by habit, and sharpened by
necessity! You have seen, like me, many literary reputa-
tions, promoted by the influence of fashion, which have
scarce survived the possessor; you have seen the poor
hardly earn the little reputation they acquired, and their
merit only acknowledged when they were incapable of en-
joying the pleasures of popularity: such, however, is the
reputation worth possessing ; that which is hardly earned
is hardly lost. Adieu.
LETTER XCIV.
From Hingpo in Moscow, to Lien Chi Altangi in London.
THE PHILOSOPHER'S SON is AGAIN SEPARATED FROM HIS
BEAUTIFUL COMPANION.'
WHERE will my disappointments end ? Must I still be
doomed to accuse the severity of my fortune, and show my
constancy in distress, rather than moderation in prosperity ?
I had at least hopes of conveying my charming companion
safe from the reach of every enemy, and of again restoring
her to her native soil. But those hopes are now no more.
Upon leaving Terki, we took the nearest road to the
dominions of Russia. We passed the Ural mountains,
1 Dated Oct. 27, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
covered in eternal snow, and traversed the forests of Ufa,
where the prowling bear and shrieking hyaena keep an
undisputed possession. We next embarked upon the
rapid river Bulija, and made the best of our way to the
banks of the Wolga, where it waters the fruitful valleys of
Casan.
There were two vessels in company, properly equipped
and armed, in order to oppose the Wolga pirates, who, we
were informed, infested this river. Of all mankind these
pirates are the most terrible. They are composed of the
criminals and outlawed peasants of Russia, who fly to the
forests that lie along the banks of the Wolga for protection.
Here, they join in parties, lead a savage life, and have no
other subsistence but plunder. Being deprived of houses,
friends, or a fixed habitation, they become more terrible
even than the tiger, and as insensible to all the feelings of
humanity. They neither give quarter to those they conquer,
nor receive it when overpowered themselves. The severity
of the laws against them serves to increase their barbarity,
and seems to make them a neutral species of beings,
between the wildness of the lion and the subtlety of
the man. When taken alive, their punishment is hideous.
A floating gibbet is erected, which is let run down with the
stream; here, upon an iron hook stuck under their ribs,
and upon which the whole weight of their body depends,
they are left to expire in the most terrible agonies, some
being thus found to linger several days successively.
We were but three days voyage from the confluence of
this river into the Wolga, when we perceived at a distance
behind us an armed bark coming up, with the assistance of
sails and oars, in order to attack us. The dreadful signal
of death was hung upon the mast, and our captain with his
glass could easily discern them to be pirates. It is impos-
sible to express our consternation on this occasion; the
whole crew instantly came together to consult the properest
means of safety. It was, therefore, soon determined to
send off our women and valuable commodities in one of our
vessels, and that the men should stay in the other, and
boldly oppose the enemy. This resolution was soon put
into execution, and I now reluctantly parted from the
beautiful Zelis, for the first time since our retreat from
<pb>
Persia. The vessel in which she was disappeared to my
longing eyes in proportion as that of the pirates approached
us. They soon came up; but, upon examining our strength,
and perhaps sensible of the manner in which we had sent
off our most valuable effects, they seemed more eager to
pursue the vessel we had sent away than attack us. In
this manner they continued to harass us for three days,
still endeavouring to pass us without fighting. But, on
the fourth day, finding it entirely impossible, and despair-
ing to seize the expected booty, they desisted from their
endeavours, and left us to pursue our voyage without
interruption.
Our joy on this occasion was great; but soon a disap-
pointment more terrible, because unexpected, succeeded.
The bark in which our women and treasure were sent off,
was wrecked upon the banks of the Wolga, for want of a
proper number of hands to manage her, and the whole
crew carried by the peasants up the country. Of this, how-
ever, we were not sensible till our arrival at Moscow;
where, expecting to meet our separated bark, we were in-
formed of its misfortune, and our loss. Need I paint the
situation of my mind on this occasion ? Need I describe
all I feel, when I despair of beholding the beautiful Zelis
more ? Fancy had dressed the future prospect of my life
in the gayest colouring; but one unexpected stroke of for-
tune has robbed it of every charm. Her dear idea mixes
with every scene of pleasure, and without her presence to
enliven it, the whole becomes tedious, insipid, insupportable.
I will confess—now that she is lost, I will confess, I loved
her; nor is it in the power of time or of reason to erase
her image from my heart. Adieu.
<pb>
LETTEE XCV.
From Lien Ch i Altangi, to Hingpo, at Moscow.'
THE FATHER CONSOLES HIM UPON THIS OCCASION. [ON
BEARING MISFORTUNE.]
YOUR misfortunes are mine; but, as every period of life
is marked with its own, you must learn to endure them.
Disappointed love makes the misery of youth; disappointed
ambition, that of manhood; and successless avarice, that of
age. These three attack us through life; and it is our
duty to stand upon our guard. To love, we ought to
oppose dissipation, and endeavour to change the object of
the affections ; to ambition, the happiness of indolence and
obscurity; and to avarice, the fear of soon dying. These
are the shields with which we should arm ourselves ; and
thus make every scene of life, if not pleasing, at least
supportable.
Men complain of not finding a place of repose. They
are in the wrong: they have it for seeking. What they
should indeed complain of is, that the heart is an enemy to
that very repose they seek. To themselves alone should
they impute their discontent. They seek within the short
span of life to satisfy a thousand desires, each of which
alone is insatiable. One month passes, and another comes
on; the year ends, and then begins ; but man is still un-
changing in folly, still blindly continuing in prejudice.
To the wise man, every climate, and every soil is pleasing;
to him a parterre of flowers is the famous valley of gold;
to him a little brook, the fountain of the young peach trees ;2
to such a man the melody of birds is more ravishing than
the harmony of a full concert; and the tincture of the cloud
preferable to the touch of the finest pencil.
1 This letter is a rhapsody from the Maxims of the philosopher Me.
Vide Lett, curieuse et edifiant. Vide etiam Du Halde, vol. ii., p. 98.—
GOLDSMITH. [The date in the Public Ledger is Oct. 29,1760.—En.]
2 This passage the editor does not understand.—GOLDSMITH. [This
note is not in the Public Ledger.—ED.]
<pb>
The life of man is a journey; a journey that must be
travelled, however bad the roads or the accommodation.
If, in the beginning, it is found dangerous, narrow, and
difficult, it must either grow better in the end, or we shall,
by custom, learn to bear its inequality.
But, though I see you incapable of penetrating into grand
principles, attend at least to a simile adapted to every
apprehension. I am mounted upon a wretched ass, I see
another man before me upon a sprightly horse, at which I
find some uneasiness. I look behind me, and see numbers
on foot, stooping under heavy burdens; let me learn to pity
their estate, and thank Heaven for my own.
Shingfu, when under misfortunes, would, in the begin-
ning, weep like a child ; but he soon recovered his former
tranquillity. After indulging grief for a few days, he would
become, as usual, the most merry old man in all the pro-
vince of Shansi. About the time that his wife died, his
possessions were all consumed by fire, and his only son
sold into captivity; Shingfu grieved for one day, and the
next went to dance at a mandarine's door for his dinner.
The company were surprised to see the old man so merry,
when suffering such great losses; and the mandarine him-
self coming out, asked him, how he, who had grieved so
much, and given way to calamity the day before, could now
be so cheerful ? " You ask me one question," cries the old
man, " let me answer by asking another: Which is the
most durable, a hard thing, or a soft thing; that which
resists, or that which makes no resistance ? "—" A hard
thing, to be sure," replied the mandarine.—" There you are
wrong," returned Shingfu, " I am now four score years old ;
and, if you look in my mouth, you will find that I have lost
all my teeth, and not a bit of my tongue." Adieu.
<pb>
LETTER XCVI.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President of
the Ceremonial Academy at PeJcin, in China.
THE CONDOLENCE AND CONGRATULATION UPON THE DEATH
OF THE LATE KING RIDICULED. ENGLISH MOURNING
DESCRIBED.1
THE manner of grieving for our departed friends in
China, is very different from that of Europe. The mourn-
ing colour of Europe is black; that of China white. When
a parent or relation dies here—for they seldom mourn for
friends—it is only clapping on a suit of sables, grimacing
it for a few days, and all, soon forgotten, goes on as before;
not a single creature missing the deceased, except, perhaps
a favourite housekeeper, or a favourite cat.
On the contrary, with us in China it is a very serious
affair. The piety with which I have seen you behave, on
one of these occasions, should never be forgotten. I re-
member it was upon the death of thy grandmother's
maiden sister. The coflin was exposed in the principal hall,
in public view. Before it were placed the figures of eunuchs,
horses, tortoises, and other animals, in attitudes of grief
and respect. The more distant relations of the old lady,
and I among the number, came to pay our compliments of
condolence, and to salute the deceased, after the manner of
our country. We had scarce presented our wax candles
and perfumes, and given the howl of departure, when,
crawling on his belly from under a curtain, out came the
reverend Fum Hoam himself, in all the dismal solemnity
of distress. Your looks were set for sorrow ; your clothing
consisted of a hempen bag tied round the neck with a
string. For two long months 2 did this mourning continue.
By night, you lay stretched on a single mat, and sat on the
stool of discontent by day. Pious man! who could thus
1 Dated Nov. 5, 1760, in the Ptiblic Ledger.—ED.
2 The Ledger has " two years," which perhaps is a misprint. Never-
theless, Sir J. F. Davis says that though interment takes place twenty-
one days after death, the period of mourning generally required is
twenty-seven months. See also note at p. 67.—ED.
III. A A
<pb>
set an example of sorrow and decorum to our country.
Pious country! where, if we do not grieve at the departure
of our friends for their sakes, at least we are taught to-
regret them for our own.1
All is very different here; amazement all! What sort
of people am I got amongst ? Fum, thou son of Fo, what
sort of people am I got amongst ? No crawling round the
coffin ; no dressing up in hempen bags; no lying on mats,
or sitting on stools! Gentlemen here shall put on first
mourning, with as sprightly an air as if preparing for a
birth-night; and widows shall actually dress for another
husband in their weeds for the former. The best jest of
all is, that our merry mourners clap bits of muslin on
their sleeves, and these are called weepers. Weeping
muslin! alas! alas ! very sorrowful truly! These weepers,
then, it seems, are to bear the whole burthen of the
distress.
But I have had the strongest instance of this contrast,
this tragi-comical behaviour in distress, upon a recent
occasion. Their king,2 whose departure, though sudden,
was not unexpected, died after a reign of many years.
His age, and uncertain state of health, served, in some
measure, to diminish the sorrow of his subjects; and their
expectations from his successor seemed to balance their
minds between uneasiness and satisfaction. But how
ought they to have behaved on such an occasion ? Surely,
they ought rather to have endeavoured to testify their
gratitude to their deceased friend, than to proclaim their
hopes of the future! Sure, even the successor must sup-
pose their love to wear the face of adulation, which so
quickly changed the object! However, the very same day
on which the old king died, they made rejoicing for
the new!
1 Sir F. J. Davis says ('Chinese,' 1836, v. i. p. 258):—"When a
parent or elder relation among the Chinese dies . . . each side of the
doors is distinguished by labels in white, which is the mourning colour.
The lineal descendants of the deceased, clothed in coarse white cloth,
with bandages of the same round their heads, sit weeping round the
corpse on the ground, the women keeping up a dismal howl after the
manner of the Irish."—ED.
2 George the Second died in the seventy-seventh year of his age, and
the thirty-fourth of his reign, 25th October, 1760.-—ED.
<pb>
For my part, I have no conception of this new manner
of mourning and rejoicing in a breath ; of being merry
and sad ; of mixing a funeral procession with a jig and a
bonfire. At least, it would have been just, that they who
flattered the king, while living, for virtues which he had
not, should lament him dead, for those he really had.
In this universal cause for national distress, as I had no
interest myself, so it is but natural to suppose I felt no
real affliction. " In all the losses of our friends," says a
European philosopher, " we first consider how much our
own welfare is affected by their departure, and moderate
our real grief just in the same proportion."' Now, as I had
neither received, nor expected to receive, favours from
kings or their flatterers; as I had no acquaintance in par-
ticular with their late monarch; as I knew that the place
of a king is soon supplied; and, as the Chinese proverb
has it, that though the world may sometimes want cobblers
to mend their shoes, there is no danger of its wanting
emperors to rule their kingdoms; from such considera-
tions, I could bear the loss of a king with the most philo-
sophic resignation. However, I thought it my duty at
least to appear sorrowful; to put on a melancholy aspect,
or to set my face by that of the people.
The first company I came amongst, after the news be-
came general, was a set of jolly companions, who were
drinking prosperity to the ensuing reign. I entered the
room with looks of despair, and even expected applause for
the superlative misery of my countenance. Instead of
that, I was universally condemned by the company for a
grimacing son of a whore, and desired to take away my
penitential phiz to some other quarter. I now corrected
my former mistake, and, with the most sprightly air
imaginable, entered a company, where they were talking
over the ceremonies of the approaching funeral. Here I
sat for some time with an air of pert vivacity; when one
of the chief mourners immediately observing my good-
humour, desired me, if I pleased, to go and grin some-
where else; they wanted no disaffected scoundrels there.
Leaving this company, therefore, I was resolved to assume
1 Rochefoucauld, probably ; Reflection 248, ed. 1665.—ED.
<pb>
a look perfectly neutral: and have ever since been study-
ing the fashionable air; something between jest and
earnest; a complete virginity of face, uncontaminated with
the smallest symptom of meaning.
But though grief be a very slight affair here, the mourn-
ing, my friend, is a very important concern. When an
emperor dies in China, the whole expense of the solemnities
is defrayed from the royal coffers. When the great die
here, mandarines are ready enough to order mourning;
but I do not see that they are so ready to pay for it. If
they send me down from court the grey undress frock, or
the black coat without pocket-holes, I am willing enough
to comply with their commands, and wear both ; but, by
the head of Confucius! to be obliged to wear black, and
buy it into the bargain, is more than my tranquillity of
temper can bear. What! order me to wear mourning
before they know whether I can buy it or no ! Fum, thou
son of Fo, what sort of a people am I got amongst ? where
being out of black is a certain symptom of poverty; where
those who have miserable faces cannot have mourning, and
those who have mourning will not wear a miserable face!
[Adieu.]
LETTER XCVII.
To the Scnne.
ALMOST EVERY SUBJECT OF LITERATURE HAS BEEN
IT is usual for the booksellers here, when a book has
given universal pleasure upon one subject, to bring out
several more upon the same plan ; which are sure to have
purchasers and readers, from that desire which all men
have to view a pleasing object on every side. The first
performance serves rather to awaken than satisfy atten-
1 Dated in the Public Ledger, Nov. 7, 1760.—ED.
<pb>
tion; and, when that is once moved, the slightest effort
serves to continue its progression: the merit of the first
diffuses a light sufficient to illuminate the succeeding
efforts; and no other subject can be relished, till that is
exhausted. A stupid work coming thus immediately in
the train of an applauded performance, weans the mind
from the object of its pleasure, and resembles the sponge
thrust into the mouth of a discharged culverin, in order to
adapt it for a new explosion.
This manner, however, of drawing off a subject, or a
peculiar mode of writing to the dregs, effectually precludes
a revival of that subject or manner for some time for the
future; the sated reader turns from it with a kind of lite-
rary nausea ; and, though the titles of books are the part
of them most read, yet he has scarce perseverance enough
to wade through the title-page.
Of this number, I own myself one : I am now grown
callous to several subjects, and different kinds of composi-
tion. Whether such originally pleased I will not take
upon me to determine ; but at present I spurn a new book,
merely upon seeing its name in an advertisement; nor have
the smallest curiosity to look beyond the first leaf, even
though, in the second, the author promises his own face
neatly engraved on copper.
I am become a perfect epicure in reading ; plain beef, or
solid mutton will never do. I am for a Chinese dish of
bears' claws and birds' nests.1 I am for sauce strong with
assafcetida,2 or fuming with garlic. For this reason there
are a hundred very wise, learned, virtuous, well intended
productions, that have no charms for me. Thus, for the
soul of me, I could never find courage nor grace enough
to wade above two pages deep into " Thoughts upon
God and Nature; " or " Thoughts upon Providence ; " or
" Thoughts upon Free Grace ;" or, indeed, into "Thoughts"
upon any thing at all. I can no longer meditate with
" Meditations for Every Day in the Year." " Essays upon
Diverse Subjects" cannot allure me, though never so in-
teresting; and, as for " Funeral Sermons," or even "Thanks-
1 See Letter XXXIII., p. 125, ante.—ED.
5 Assafcetida, a promoter of digestion, resembling garlic. The
Romans used it.—ED.
<pb>
giving Sermons,"1 I can neither weep with the one nor
rejoice with the other.1
But it is chiefly in gentle poetry where I seldom look
farther than the title. The truth is, I take up books to be
told something new; but here, as it is now managed, the
reader is told nothing. He opens the book, and there finds
very good words, truly, and much exactness of rhyme, but
no information. A parcel of gaudy images pass on before
his imagination like the figures in a dream ; but curiosity,
induction, reason, and the whole train of affections, are
fast asleep. The jucunda et idonea vitce—those sallies
which mend the heart, while they amuse the fancy—are
quite forgotten; so that a reader, who would take up some
modern applauded performances of this kind, must, in
order to be pleased, first leave his good sense behind him,
take for his recompense and guide bloated and compound
epithet, and dwell on paintings, just, indeed, because la-
boured with minute exactness.2
If we examine, however, our internal sensations, we shall
find ourselves but little pleased with such laboured vani-
ties ; we shall find that our applause rather proceeds from
a kind of contagion caught up from others, and which we
contribute to diffuse, than from what we privately feel.
There are some subjects of which almost all the world per-
ceive the futility ; yet all combine in imposing [them] upon
each other, as worthy of praise. But chiefly this imposi-
tion obtains in literature, where men publicly contemn
what they relish with rapture in private, and approve
abroad what has given them disgust at home. The truth
is, we deliver those criticisms in public which are sup-
posed to be best calculated not to do justice to the author,
but to impress others with an opinion of our superior
discernment.
But let works of this kind, which have already come off
with such applause, enjoy it all. It is not my wish to
diminish, as I was never considerable enough to add to
their fame. But, for the future, I fear there are many
'-1 The Ledger has instead :—" the very sound gives me the spleen."
—Eo.
2 Compare the author on modern poets in the ' Vicar of Wakefield'
(chap, viii.), and elsewhere.—ED.
<pb>
poems of which. I shall find spirits to read but the title.
In the first place, all odes upon Winter, or Summer, or
Autumn—in short, all odes, epodes, and monodies whatso-
ever, shall hereafter be deemed too polite, classical, obscure,
and refined, to be read, and entirely above human compre-
hension. Pastorals are pretty enough—for those that like
them.; but to me, Thyrsis is one of the most insipid fel-
lows I ever conversed with; and as for Corydon, I do not
choose his company. Elegies and epistles are very fine—
to those to whom they are addressed; and as for epic
poems, I am generally able to discover the whole plan in
reading the two first pages.
Tragedies, however, as they are now made, are good in-
structive moral sermons enough; and it would be a fault
not to be pleased with good things. There I learn several
great truths ; as, that it is impossible to see into the ways
of futurity; that punishment always attends the villain;
that love is the fond soother of the human breast; that we
should not resist Heaven's will,—for in resisting Heaven's
will, Heaven's will is resisted; with several other senti-
ments equally new, delicate, and striking. Every new
tragedy, therefore, I shall go to see; for reflections of this
nature make a tolerable harmony, when mixed up with a
proper quantity of drum, trumpet, thunder, lightning, or
the scene-shifter's whistle. Adieu.
LETTER XCVIII.
To the Same.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE COURTS OF JUSTICE IN
WESTMINSTER HALL.1
I HAD some intentions lately of going to visit Bedlam,
the place where those who go mad are confined. I went to
wait upon the man in black to be my conductor, but I
found him preparing to go to Westminster-hall, where the
1 Dated Nov. 28, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—-Bo.
<pb>
English hold their courts of justice. It gave me some sur-
prise to find my friend engaged in a law-suit, but more so-
. when he informed me that it had been depending for several
years. "How is it possible," cried I, "for a man wha
knows the world to go to law ? I am well acquainted with
the courts of justice in China: they resemble rat-traps
every one of them; nothing more easy than' to get in, but
to get out again is attended with some difficulty, and more
cunning than rats are generally found to possess! "
" Faith," replied my friend, " I should not have gone to
law but that I was assured of success before I began; things
were presented to me in so alluring a light, that I thought
by barely declaring myself a candidate for the prize, I had
nothing more to do but to enjoy the fruits of the victory.
Thus have I been upon the eve of an imaginary triumph
every term these ten years; have travelled forward with
victory ever in my view, but ever out of reach ; however,
at present, I fancy we have hampered our antagonist in
such a manner, that, without some unforeseen demur, we
shall this very day lay him fairly on his back."
" If things be so situated," said I, " I do not care if I
attend you to the courts, and partake in the pleasure of
your success. But prithee," continued I, as we set forward,
" what reasons have you to think an affair at last concluded,
vv'liich has given you so many former disappointments ? "—
" My lawyer tells me," returned he, " that I have Salkeld
and Ventris strong in my favour, and that there are no less
than fifteen cases in point."-—" I understand," said I,
" those are two of your judges who have already declared
their opinions."—" Pardon me," replied my friend, " Sal-
keld and Ventris are lawyers who some hundred years ago
gave their opinions on cases similar to mine; these opinions,
which make for me, my lawyer is to cite; and those opi-
nions which look another way are cited by the lawyer em-
ployed by my antagonist: as I observed, I have Salkeld
and Ventris for me ; he has Coke and Hales for him ; and
he that has most opinions is most likely to carry his cause."
—" But where is the necessity," cried I, " of prolonging a.
suit by citing the opinions and reports of others, since the
1 The word " than" was inserted by Percy.—Eu.
-.
<pb>
 same good sense which determined lawyers in former ages,
may serve to guide your judges at this day? They at that
time gave their opinions only from the light of reason;
your judges have the same light at present to direct them ;
let me even add, a greater, as in former ages there were
many prejudices from which the present is happily free.
If arguing from authorities be exploded from every other
branch of learning, why should it be particularly adhered
to in this ? I plainly foresee how such a method of investi-
gation must embarrass every suit, and even perplex the stu-
dent ; ceremonies will be multiplied, formalities must in-
crease, and more time will thus be spent in learning the
arts of litigation, than in the discovery of right."
" I see," cries my friend, " that you are for a speedy ad-
ministration of justice; but all the world will grant, that
the more time that is taken up in considering any subject,
the better it will be understood. Besides, it is the boast
of an Englishman, that his property is secure, and all the
world will grant, that a deliberate administration of justice
is the best way to secure his property. Why have we so
many lawyers, but to secure our property ? why so many
formalities, but to secure our property ? Not less than one
hundred thousand families live in opulence, elegance, and
ease, merely by securing our property,"
" To embarrass justice," returned I, " by a multiplicity
of laws, or to hazard it by a confidence in our judges, are,
I grant, the opposite rocks on which legislative wisdom has
ever split: in one case, the client resembles that emperor,
who is said to have been suffocated with the bed-clothes
which were only designed to keep him warm; in the other,
to that town which let the enemy take possession of its
walls, in order to show the world how little they depended
upon aught but courage for safety.—But, bless me ! what
numbers do I see here—all in black !—how is it possible
that half this multitude can find employment ? "—" No-
thing so easily conceived," returned my companion ; " they
live by watching each other. For instance, the catchpole
watches the man in debt, the attorney watches the catch-
pole, the counsellor watches the attorney, the solicitor the
counsellor, and all find sufficient employment."—" I con-
ceive you," interrupted I, " they watch each other, but it is
<pb>
the client that pays them all for watching; it puts me in
mind of a Chinese fable, which is entitled, FIVE ANIMALS
AT A MEAL.—
" A grasshopper, filled with dew, was merrily singing
under a shade ; a whangam, that eats grasshoppers, had
marked it for its prey, and was just stretching forth to de-
vour it; a serpent, that had for a long time fed only on
whangams, was coiled up to fasten on the whangam; a
yellow bird was just upon the wing to dart upon the ser-
pent; a hawk had just stooped from above to seize the
yellow bird ; all were intent on their prey, and unmindful
of their danger : so the whangam ate the grasshopper, the
serpent ate the whangam, the yellow bird the serpent, and
the hawk the yellow bird; when, sousing from on high, a
vulture gobbled up the hawk, grasshopper, whangam, and
all in a moment."
I had scarce finished my fable, when the lawyer came to
inform my friend, that his cause was put off till another
term, that money was wanted to retain, and that all the
world was of opinion, that the very next hearing would
bring him off victorious. " If so, then," cries my friend,
" I believe it will be my wisest way to continue the cause
for another term; and, in the meantime, my friend here
and I will go and see Bedlam." Adieu.
LETTER XCIX.
To the Same.
A VISIT FROM THE LITTLE BEAU. THE INDULGENCE WITH
WHICH THE FAIR SEX ARE TREATED IN SEVERAL PARTS
I LATELY received a visit from the little beau, who, I
found, had assumed a new flow of spirits with a new suit
of clothes. Our discourse happened to turn upon the dif-
ferent treatment of the fair sex here and in Asia, with the
1 Dated Dec. 29, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—Eto.
<pb>
influence of beauty in refining our manners, and improving
our conversation.
I soon perceived he was strongly prejudiced in favour of
the Asiatic method of treating the sex, and that it was im-
possible to persuade him, but that a man was happier who
had four wives at his command, than he who had only one.
" It is true," cries he, " your men of fashion in the East are
slaves, and under some terrors of having their throats
squeezed by a bow-string ; but what then ? they can find
ample consolation in a seraglio ; they make, indeed, an in-
different figure in conversation abroad, but then they have
a seraglio to console them at home. I am told they have
no balls, drums, nor operas, but then they have got a
seraglio; they may be deprived of wine and French
cookery, but they have a seraglio: a seraglio—a seraglio,
my dear creature, wipes off every inconvenience 'in the
world!1
" Besides, I am told, your Asiatic beauties are the most
convenient women alive ; for they have no souls : positively
there is nothing in nature I should like so much as ladies
without souls; soul, here, is the utter ruin of half the sex.
A girl of eighteen shall have soul enough to spend a hun-
dred pounds in the turning of a trump. Her mother shall
have soul enough to ride a sweepstake match at a horse-
race ; her maiden aunt shall have soul enough to purchase
the furniture of a whole toy-shop ; and others shall have
soul enough to behave as if they had no souls at all."
" With respect to the soul," interrupted I, " the Asiatics
are much kinder to the fair sex than you imagine: instead
of one soul, Fohi, the idol of China, gives every woman
three ;2 the Brahmins give them fifteen;3 and even Ma-
homet himself nowhere excludes the sex from Paradise.
Abulfeda4 reports, that an old woman one day impor-
tuning him to know what she ought to do in order to gain
'-' The ieAjrerhas instead—" and is a panacea for every olamity."—
ED.
5 In the Ledger the author gives a foot-note thus : " Vid. Du HaMe
passim."—ED.
3 Foot-note in Ledger: " Hyde rel. Pers."—ED.
4 A geographer and historian ; born at Damascus, 1273 ; died 1331.
He wrote a Life of Mahomet which was published at Oxford in 1723.
—ED.
<pb>
Paradise—' My good lady,' answered the prophet, ' old
women never get there.'—' What! never get to Paradise ? '
returned the matron, in a fury. ' Never,' says he, ' for they
always grow young by the way.'l
" No, Sir," continued I; " the men of Asia behave with
more deference to the sex than you seem to imagine. As
you of Europe say grace upon sitting down to dinner, so it
is the custom in China to say grace when a man goes to
bed to his wife."—" And may I die," returned my com-
panion, " but a very pretty ceremony! for, seriously, Sir,
I see no reason why a man should not be as grateful in
one situation as in the other. Upon honour, I always
find myself much more disposed to gratitude on the couch
of a fine woman, than upon sitting down to a sirloin of
beef."
" Another ceremony," said I, resuming the conversation,
" in favour of the sex, amongst us, is the bride's being
allowed, after marriage, her three days of freedom. During
this interval, a thousand extravagances are practised by
either sex. The lady is placed upon the nuptial bed, and
numberless monkey tricks are played round to divert her.
One gentleman smells her perfumed handkerchief, another
attempts to untie her garters, a third pulls off her shoe to
play hunt the slipper,2 another pretends to be an idiot, and
endeavours to raise a laugh by grimacing; in the mean
time, the glass goes briskly about, till ladies, gentlemen,
wife, husband, and all, are mixed together in one inunda-
tion of arrack punch."
" Strike me dumb, deaf, and blind," cried my com-
panion, " but very pretty! there's some sense in your
Chinese ladies' condescensions! but, among us, you shall
scarce find one of the whole sex that shall hold her good-
humour for three days together. No later than yester-
day, I happened to say some civil things to a citizen's
wife of my acquaintance, not because I loved her, but be-
cause I had charity ; and what do you think was the tender
creature's reply ? Only that she detested my pig-tail wig,
high-heeled shoes, and sallow complexion! That is all.
Nothing more!—Yes, by the heavens, though she was
1 Foot-note in Ledger: " Vid. Alcoran, cap. 54."—ED.
2 Foot-note in Ledger: " Vid. Du Halde, vol. ii. Folio, p. 45."—ED.
<pb>
more ugly than an unpainted actress, I found her more
insolent than a thorough bred woman of quality! "
He was proceeding in this wild manner, when his invec-
tive was interrupted by the man in black, who entered the
apartment, introducing his niece, a young lady of exquisite
beauty. Her very appearance was sufficient to silence the
severest satirist of the sex ; easy without pride, and free
without impudence, she seemed capable of supplying every
sense with pleasure. Her looks, her conversation, were
natural and unconstrained; she had neither been taught
to languish nor ogle, to laugh without a jest, or sigh with-
out sorrow. I found that she had just returned from
abroad, and had been conversant in the manners of the
world. Curiosity prompted me to ask several questions,
but she declined them all. I own I never found myself so
strongly prejudiced in favour of apparent merit before, and
could willingly have prolonged our conversation, but the
company after some time withdrew. Just, however, before
the little beau took his leave, he called me aside, and re-
quested I would change him a twenty pound bill; which,
as I was incapable of doing, he was contented with borrow-
ing half-a-crown. Adieu.
 LETTER C.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Hingpo, by the Way of Moscow.
FEW virtues have been more praised by moralists than
generosity; every practical treatise of ethics tends to in-
crease our sensibility of the distresses of others, and to
relax the grasp of frugality. Philosophers that are poor,
praise it because they are gainers by its effects; and the
opulent Seneca himself has written a treatise on benefits,
though he was known to give nothing away.
But among the many who have enforced the duty of
giving, I am surprised there are none to inculcate the
1 Dated Jan. 2, 1761, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
"
<pb>
ignominy of receiving; to show that by every favour we
accept, we in some measure forfeit our native freedom;
and that a state of continual dependence on the generosity
of others is a life of gradual debasement.
Were men taught to despise the receiving obligations
with the same force of reasoning and declamation that
they are instructed to confer them, we might then see
every person in society filling up the requisite duties of his
station with cheerful industry, neither relaxed by hope, nor
sullen from disappointment.
Every favour a man receives, in some measure sinks him
below his dignity; and, in proportion to the value of the
benefit, or the frequency of its acceptance, he gives up so
much of his natural independence. He, therefore, who
thrives upon the unmerited bounty of another, if he has
any sensibility, suffers the worst of servitude: the shackled
slave may murmur without reproach, but the humble de-
pendent is taxed with ingratitude upon every symptom of
discontent; the one may rave round the walls of his cell,
but the other lingers in all the silence of mental confine-
ment. To increase his distress, every new obligation but
adds to the former load, which kept the vigorous mind
from rising; till, at last, elastic no longer, it shapes itself
to constraint, and puts on habitual servility.
It is thus with the feeling mind; but there are some
who, born without any share of sensibility, receive favour
after favour, and still cringe for more; who accept the offer
of generosity with as little reluctance as the wages of merit,
and even make thanks for past benefits an indirect petition
for new: such, I grant, can suffer no debasement from de-
pendence, since they were originally as vile as was possible
to be; dependence degrades only the ingenuous, but leaves
the sordid mind in pristine meanness. In this manner,
therefore, long continued generosity is misplaced, or it is
injurious ; it either finds a man worthless, or it makes him
so ; and true it is, that the person who is contented to be
often obliged, ought not to have been obliged at all.
Yet, while I describe the meanness of a life of continued
dependence, I would not be thought to include those natural
or political subordinations which subsist in every society ;
for in such, though dependence is exacted from the inferior,
<pb>
yet the obligation on either side is mutual. The son must
rely upon his parent for support, but the parent lies under
the same obligations to give that the other has to expect;
the subordinate officer must receive the commands of his
superior, but for this obedience the former has a right to
demand an intercourse of favour. Such is not the depen-
dence I would deprecate, but that where every expected
favour must be the result of mere benevolence in the giver,
where the benefit can be kept without remorse, or trans-
ferred without injustice. The character of a legacy-hunter,
for instance, is detestable in some countries, and despicable
in all; this universal contempt of a man who infringes
upon none of the laws of society, some moralists have
arraigned as a popular and unjust prejudice, never con-
sidering the necessary degradations a wretch must un-
dergo, who previously expects to grow rich by benefits,
without having either natural or social claims to enforce
his petitions.
But this intercourse of benefaction and acknowledgment
is often injurious even to the giver as well as the receiver.
A man can gain but little knowledge of himself, or of the
world, amidst a circle of those whom hope or gratitude has
gathered round him; their unceasing humiliations must
necessarily increase his comparative magnitude, for all
men measure their own abilities by those of their company:
thus being taught to overrate his merit, he in reality lessens
it ; increasing in confidence, but not in power, his profes-
sions end in empty boast, his undertakings in shameful
disappointment.
It is, perhaps, one of the severest misfortunes of the
great, that they are, in general, obliged to live among men
whose real value is lessened by dependence, and whose
minds are enslaved by obligation. The humble companion
may have at first accepted patronage with generous views;
but soon he feels the mortifying influence of conscious in-
feriority, by degrees sinks into a flatterer, and from flattery
at last degenerates into stupid veneration. To remedy this,
the great often dismiss their old dependants and take new.
Such changes are falsely imputed to levity, falsehood, or
caprice, in the patron, since they may be more justly as-
cribed to the client's deterioration.
<pb>
No, my son, a life of independence is generally a life of
-virtue. It is that which fits the soul for every generous
.flight of humanity, freedom, and friendship. To give
should be our pleasure, but to receive, our shame; serenity,
health, and affluence attend the desire of rising by labour:
misery, repentance, and disrespect, that of succeeding by
extorted benevolence: the man who can thank himself
alone for the happiness he enjoys is truly blest; and lovely,
far more lovely, the sturdy gloom of laborious indigence,
than the fawning simper of thriving adulation. Adieu.
LETTER CI.
From Lien CJii Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President, &c.
THAT PEOPLE MUST BE CONTENTED TO BE GUIDED BY
THOSE WHOM THEY HAVE APPOINTED TO QOVERN. A
STORY TO THIS EFFECT. [lAKUPI, THE INNOVATING
MINISTER OF TIPABTALA.]
IN every society some men are born to teach, and others
to receive instruction ; some to work, and others to enjoy
in idleness the fruits of their industry; some to govern,
and others to obey. Every people, how free soever, must
be contented to give up part of their liberty and judgment
to those who govern, in exchange for their hopes of security;
and the motives which first influenced their choice in the
election of their governors, should ever be weighed against
the succeeding apparent inconsistencies of their conduct.
All cannot be rulers, and men are generally best governed
by a few. In making way through the intricacies of busi-
ness, the smallest obstacles are apt to retard the execution
of what is to be planned by a multiplicity of counsels;
the judgment of one alone being always fittest for winding
through the labyrinths of intrigue, and the obstructions of
disappointment. A serpent which, as the fable observes,
is furnished with one head and many tails, is much more
<pb>
capable of subsistence and expedition than another which
is furnished with, but one tail and many heads.1
Obvious as these truths are, the people of this country
seem insensible of their force. Not satisfied with the
advantages of internal peace and opulence, they still mur-
mur at their governors, and interfere in the execution of
their designs, as if they wanted to be something more
than happy. But as the Europeans instruct by argument,
and the Asiatics mostly by narration, were I to address
them, I should convey my sentiments in the following
story:
Takupi had long been prime minister of Tipartala, a
fertile country that stretches along the western confines of
China. During his administration, whatever advantages
could be derived from arts, learning, and commerce, were
seen to bless the people ; nor were the necessary precau-
tions of providing for the security of the state forgotten.
It often happens, however, that when men are possessed
of all they want, they then begin to find torment from
imaginary afflictions, and lessen their present enjoyments,
by foreboding that those enjoyments are to have an end.
The people now, therefore, endeavoured to find out
grievances; and, after some search, actually began to
think themselves aggrieved. A petition against the
enormities of Takupi was carried to the throne in due
form ; and the Queen who governed the country, willing to
satisfy her subjects, appointed a day in which his accusers
should be heard, and the minister should stand upon his
defence.
The day being arrived, and the minister brought before
the tribunal, a carrier, who supplied the city with fish,
appeared among the number of his accusers. He ex-
claimed that it was the custom, time immemorial, for
carriers to bring their fish upon a horse in a hamper;
"which being placed on one side, and balanced by a stone
on the other, was thus conveyed with ease and safety; but
that the prisoner, moved either by a spirit of innovation,
or perhaps bribed by the hamper-makers, had obliged all
1 La .Fontaine's fable of the ' Dragon with many Heads and the
Dragon with many Tails' (No. XII., book i.), the plot of which, how-
ever, is traced to the Tartar emperor Ghengis Khan.—ED.
III. B B
<pb>
carriers to use the stone no longer, but balance one
hamper with another; an order entirely repugnant to the
customs of all antiquity, and those of the kingdom of
Tipartala in particular.
The carrier finished, and the whole court shook their
heads at the innovating minister; when a second witness
appeared. He was inspector of the city buildings, and
accused the disgraced favourite of having given orders
for the demolition of an ancient ruin, which obstructed
the passage through one of the principal streets. He ob-
served, that such buildings were noble monuments of
barbarous antiquity; contributed finely to show how little
their ancestors understood of architecture; and for that
reason such monuments should be held sacred, and suffered
gradually to decay.
The last witness now appeared. This was a widow, who
had laudably attempted to burn herself upon her husband's
funeral pile. But the innovating minister had prevented
the execution of her design, and was insensible to her
tears, protestations, and entreaties.
The Queen could have pardoned the two former offences ;
but this last was considered as so gross an injury to the
sex, and so directly contrary to all the customs of an-
tiquity, that it called for immediate justice. " What!"
cried the Queen, " not suffer a woman to burn herself when
she thinks proper ? The sex are to be very prettily tutored,
no doubt, if they must be restrained frojn entertaining
their female friends now and then with a fried wife, or
roasted acquaintance. I sentence the criminal to be
banished my presence for ever, for his injurious treatment
of the sex ! "
Takupi had been hitherto silent, and spoke only to show
the sincerity of his resignation. " Great Queen," cried he,
" I acknowledge my crime ; and since I am to be banished,
I beg it may be to some ruined town, or desolate village
in the country I have governed. I shall find some pleasure
in improving the soil, and bringing back a spirit of industry
among the inhabitants." His request appearing reason-
able, it was immediately complied with; and a courtier had
orders to fix upon a place of banishment answering the
minister's description. After some months search, how-
<pb>
ever, the enquiry proved fruitless; neither a desolate village
nor a ruined town was found in the whole kingdom.
" Alas," said Takupi then to the Queen, " how can that
country be ill governed which has neither a desolate village
nor a ruined town in it ? " The Queen perceived the justice
of his expostulation, and the minister was received into
more than former favour.
LETTER OIL
To the Same.
THE PASSION FOB GAMING AMONG LADIES RIDICULED.1
THE ladies here are by no means such ardent gamesters
as the women of Asia. In this respect I must do the
English justice; for I love to praise where applause is
justly merited.2 Nothing [is] more common in China than
to see two women of fashion continue gaming till one has
won all the other's clothes, and stripped her quite naked ;
the winner thus marching off in a double suit of finery,
and the loser shrinking behind in the primitive simplicity
of nature.
No doubt, you remember when Shang, our maiden aunt,
played with a sharper. First her money went; then her
trinkets were produced; her clothes followed, piece by
piece, soon after; when she had thus played herself quite
naked, being a woman of spirit, and willing to pursue her
own, she staked her teeth: fortune was against her even
1 Dated Jan. 13. 1761, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
' " Faro, piquet, whist, and ' dear' brag formed the great delight and
were almost the «nly amusements of ladies during the middle of the last
century. For the most part they either affected frivolous gaiety, or
plumed themselves on notability as housewives, in either case the exer-
cise of the faculties by the varied intellectual resources which now abound
being equally unknown. In No. 15 of the Rambler (May, 1750) there
is a letter from a lady on the point of being ' dragged into the country,'
as she calls it, by her husband, in which she avows that on the road she
will amuse herself by making the monkey play at cards with her."—
KNIGHT.
<pb>
here, and her teeth followed her clothes. At last she
played for her left eye ; and, oh ! hard fate, this too she
lost: however, she had the consolation of biting the sharper,
for he never perceived that it was made of glass till it be-
came his own.
How happy, my friend, are the English ladies, who
never rise to such an inordinance of passion! Though the
sex here are naturally fond of games of chance, and are
taught to manage games of skill from their infancy, yet
they never pursue ill fortune with such amazing intrepidity.
Indeed, I may entirely acquit them of ever playing—I
mean of playing for their eyes or their teeth.
It is true, they often stake their fortune, their beauty,
health, and reputations, at a gaming table. It even some-
times happens, that they play their husbands into a jail;
yet still they preserve a decorum unknown to our wives
and daughters in China. I have been present at a rout
in this country, where a woman of fashion, after losing
her money, has sat writhing in all the agonies of bad
luck; and yet, after all, never once attempted to strip a
single petticoat, or cover the board, as her last stake, with
her head-clothes.
However, though I praise their moderation at play, I
must not conceal their assiduity. In China, our women,
except upon some great days, are never permitted to finger
a. dice-box; but here every day seems to be a festival, and
night itself, which gives others rest, only serves to increase
the female gamester's industry. I have been told of an
old lady in the country who, being given over by the
physicians, played with the curate of her parish to pass the
time away : having won all his money, she next proposed
playing for her funeral charges: her proposal was accepted ;
but unfortunately the lady expired just as she had taken
in her game.
There are some passions which, though differently pur-
sued, are attended with equal consequences in every
country: here they game with more perseverance, there
with greater fury; here they strip their families, there
they strip themselves naked. A lady in China who in-
dulges a passion for gaming, often becomes a drunkard ;
and by flourishing a dice-box in one hand, she generally
<pb>
comes to brandish a dram-cup in the other. Far be it from
me to say there are any who drink drams in England ; but
it is natural to suppose, that when a lady has lost every
thing else but her honour, she will be apt to toss that into
the bargain; and, grown insensible to nicer feelings, behave
like the Spaniard, who, when all his money was gone, en-
deavoured to borrow more, by offering to pawn his whisker.1
Adieu.
LETTER CIII.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to * * *, Merchant in Amsterdam.
THE CHINESE PHILOSOPHER BEGINS TO THINK OF
QUITTING ENGLAND.2
I HAVE just received a letter from my son, in which he
informs me of the fruitlessness of his endeavours to re-
cover the lady with whom he fled from Persia. He strives
to cover, under the appearance of fortitude, a heart torn
with anxiety and disappointment. I have offered little
consolation, since that but too frequently feeds the sorrow
which it pretends to deplore, and strengthens the impression
which nothing but the external rubs of time and accident
can thoroughly efface.
He informs me of his intentions of quitting Moscow the
first opportunity, and travelling by land to Amsterdam. I
must, therefore, upon his arrival, entreat the continuance
of your friendship, and beg of you to provide him with
proper directions for finding me in London. You can
scarcely be sensible of the joy I expect upon seeing him
1 The early editions, including that of the Public Ledger, have
" whisker." Some late editions correct this to " whiskers;" but it
seems that originally " whisker" simply meant" beard," and that conse-
quently one could no more speak of a man's "whiskers" than of his
" beards."—ED.
2 By this time the Ledger readers seem to have become somewhat
tired of the Chinese Letters, or the author became tired of writing them.
At first two or more each week were published. Towards the end of
1760, they scarcely averaged one a week; and in the early months of
1761 but two or three per month appeared.—ED.
<pb>
once more: the ties between the father and the son among
us of China, are much more closely drawn than with you
of Europe.
The remittances sent me from Argun to Moscow came
in safety. I cannot sufficiently admire that spirit of
honesty which prevails through the whole country of
Siberia: perhaps the savages of that desolate region are
the only untutored people of the globe that cultivate the
moral virtues, even without knowing that their actions
merit praise. I have been told surprising things of their
goodness, benevolence, and generosity; and the uninter-
rupted commerce between China and Eussia serves as a
collateral confirmation.
" Let us," says the Chinese lawgiver, " admire the rude
virtues of the ignorant, but rather imitate the delicate
morals of the polite." In the country where I reside,
though honesty and benevolence be not so congenial, yet
art supplies the place of nature. Though here every vice
is carried to excess, yet every virtue is practised also with
unexampled superiority. A city like this is the soil for
great virtues and great vices : the villain can soon improve
here in the deepest mysteries of deceiving ; and the prac-
tical philosopher can every day meet new incitements to
mend his honest intentions. There are no pleasures, sen-
sual or sentimental, which the city does not produce; yet,
I know not how, I could not be content to reside here for
life. There is something so seducing in that spot in which
we first had existence, that nothing but it can please.
Whatever vicissitudes we experience in life, however we
toil, or wheresoever we wander, our fatigued wishes still
recur to home for tranquillity: we long to die in that spot
which gave us birth, and in that pleasing expectation opiate
every calamity.1
You now, therefore, perceive that I have some intentions
of leaving this country; and yet my designed departure
fills me with reluctance and regret. Though the friend-
ships of travellers are generally more transient than vernal
snows, still I feel an uneasiness at breaking the connections
I have formed since my arrival; particularly, I shall have
1 So all the early editions. Some late editions have substituted " find
an opiate for every calamity."—ED.
<pb>
no small pain in leaving my usual companion, guide, and
instructor.1
I shall wait for the arrival of my son before I set out.
He shall be my companion in every intended journey for
the future; in his company I can support the fatigues of
the way with redoubled ardour, pleased at once with con-
veying instruction, and exacting obedience. Adieu.
LETTER CIV.
From Lien Ch i Altangi, to Fvm Hoam, First President, &c.
THE ARTS SOME MAKE USE OF TO APPEAR LEARNED.2
OUB scholars in China have a most profound veneration
for forms. A first-rate beauty never studied the decorums
of dress with more assiduity; they may properly enough
be said to be clothed with wisdom from head to foot: they
have their philosophical caps, and philosophical whiskers ;
their philosophical slippers, and philosophicalfans; there
is even a philosophical standard for measuring the nails ;
and yet, with all this seeming wisdom, they are often found
to be 3 mere empty pretenders.3
A philosophical beau is not so frequent in Europe; yet
I am told that such characters are found here. I mean
such as punctually support all the decorums of learning
without being really very profound, or naturally possessed
of a fine understanding; who labour hard to obtain the
titular honours attending literary merit, who flatter others
in order to be flattered in turn, and only study to be
thought students.
A character of this kind generally receives company in
his study, in all the pensive formality of slippers, night-
gown, and easy chair. The table is covered with a large
book, which is always kept open, and never read; his soli-
tary hours being dedicated to dozing, mending pens, feeling
1 The Man in Black, we suppose.—ED.
2 Dated Jan. 26, 1761, in the fublic Ledger.—ED.
s-3 The Ledger has,—" as dull as their neighbours."—EC.
<pb>
his pulse, peeping through the microscope, and sometimes
reading amusing books, which he condemns in company.
His library is preserved with the most religious neatness,
and is generally a repository of scarce books, which bear a
high price, because too dull or useless to become common
by the ordinary methods of publication.
Such men are generally candidates for admittance into
literary clubs, academies, and institutions, where they re-
gularly meet to give and receive a little instruction, and a
great deal of praise. In conversation they never betray
ignorance, because they never seem to receive information.
Offer a new observation, they have heard it before ; pinch
them in argument, and they reply with a sneer.
Yet, how trifling soever these little arts may appear, they
answer one valuable purpose,—of gaining the practisers the
esteem they wish for. The bounds of a man's knowledge
are easily concealed, if he has but prudence; but all can
readily see and admire a gilt library, a set of long nails, a
silver standish, or a well-combed whisker, who are incap-
able of distinguishing a dunce.
When Father Matthew,1 the first European missioner,
entered China, the court was informed that he possessed
great skill in astronomy ; he was therefore sent for, and ex-
amined. The established astronomers of state undertook this
task, and made their report to the Emperor, that his skill was
but very superficial, and no way comparable to their own.
The missioner, however, appealed from their judgment to
experience, and challenged them to calculate an eclipse of
the moon that was to happen a few nights following.
" What! " said some, " shall a barbarian without nails pre-
tend to vie with men in astronomy who have made it the
study of their lives ; with men who know half the knowable
characters of words, who wear scientifical caps and slippers,
and who have gone through every literary degree with ap-
plause ? " They accepted the challenge, confident of suc-
cess. The eclipse began: the Chinese produced a most
splendid apparatus, and were fifteen minutes wrong; the
missioner, with a single instrument, was exact to a second.
This was convincing; but the court astronomers were not
1 Matthew Ricci, an Italian Jesuit; born 1552, died at Pekin, where
he had been permitted to build a church, 1610.—ED.
<pb>
to be convinced; instead of acknowledging their error, they
assured the Emperor that their calculations were certainly
exact, but that the stranger without nails had actually
bewitched the moon. " Well, then," cries the good Em-
peror, smiling at their ignorance, " you shall still continue
to be servants of the moon ; but I constitute this man her
Controller."
China is thus replete with men whose only pretensions to
knowledge arise from external circumstances ; and, in Eu-
rope every country abounds with them in proportion to its
ignorance. Spain and Flanders, who are behind the rest
of Europe in learning at least three centuries, have twenty
literary titles and marks of distinction unknown in France
or England. They have their Clarissimi and Praeclarissimi,
their Accuratissimi and Minutissimi. A round cap entitles
one student to argue, and a square cap permits another to
teach, while a cap with a tassel almost sanctifies the head
it happens to cover. But where true knowledge is culti-
vated, these formalities begin to disappear. The ermined
cowl, the solemn beard, and sweeping train are laid aside ;
philosophers dress, and talk, and think, like other men;
and lamb-skin dressers, and cap-makers, and tail-carriers,
now deplore a literary [decay].1
For my own part, my friend, I have seen enough of pre-
suming ignorance, never to venerate wisdom but where it
actually appears. I have received literary titles and dis-
tinctions myself; and, by the quantity of my own wisdom,
know how very little wisdom they can confer. Adieu.
1 In the first and third editions and in Percy the sentence halts at
" literary," the following word having, apparently, dropped out. The
Dublin edition of 1769, probably a pirated edition, printed "literary
age;" and this most of the later editors have accepted as a correction.
If these editors, however, had referred to the Public Ledger version they
would have found " decay," as above, which probably is the word Gold-
smith also meant to use in the ' Citizen.'—ED.
<pb>
LETTER CV.
To the Same.
THE INTENDED COBONATION DESCRIBED. [BEAU TIBBS
ON THE PREPARATIONS FOR THE SHOW.]
THE time for the young king's coronation approaches.1
The great and the little world look forward with impatience.
A knight from the country, who has brought up his family
to see and be seen on this occasion, has taken all the lower
part of the house where I lodge. His wife is laying in a
large quantity of silks, which the mercer tells her are to be
fashionable next season ; and Miss, her daughter, has actu-
ally had her ears bored2 previous to the ceremony.2 In all
this bustle of preparation, I am considered as mere lumber,
and have been shoved up two stories higher, to make room
for others my landlady seems perfectly convinced are my
betters; but whom, before me, she is contented with only
calling very good company.
The little beau, who has now forced himself into my in-
timacy, was yesterday giving me a most minute detail of
the intended procession. All men are eloquent upon their
favourite topic; and this seemed peculiarly adapted to the
size and turn of his understanding. His whole mind was
blazoned over with a variety of glittering images,—coronets,
escutcheons, lace, fringe, tassels, stones, bugles, and spun
glass. " Here," cried he, " Garter is to walk; and there
1 George the Third's coronation was celebrated with great magnifi-
cence, September 22, 1761. The date of this Letter in the Public Ledger
was Feb. 10, 1761. Prior says it was published " subsequently to the
regular series of Chinese Letters," but herein he is mistaken. This
Letter is numbered CIV. in the Ledger, and the " series " there ran to
No. CXVI., dated Aug. 14, 1761. It is rather odd, however, that our
author should have written concerning the " preparations," the hiring of
seats, &c., so long before the event. Perhaps there was a postponement
of the coronation; or perhaps Goldsmith drew upon his imagination
for the scenes that were to be.-—ED.
2-2 Instead, the Ledger has,—" as she is to make her first appearance
in the family pendants, of which she is the only unmarried possessor."
—ED.
<pb>
Eouge Dragon marches with the escutcheons on his back.
Here Clarencieux moves forward; and there Blue Mantle
disdains to be left behind. Here the Aldermen march two
and two; and there the undaunted Champion of England,
no way terrified at the very numerous appearance of gentle-
men and ladies, rides forward in complete armour, and,
with an intrepid air, throws down his glove. Ah!" con-
tinued he, " should any be so hardy as to take up that fatal
glove, and so accept the challenge, we should see fine sport;
the Champion would show him no mercy; he would soon
teach him all his passes, with a witness. However, I am
afraid we shall have none willing to try with him upon the
approaching occasion, for two reasons,—first, because his
antagonist would stand a chance of being killed in the
single combat; and, secondly, because if he escapes the
Champion's arm, he would certainly be hanged for treason.
No, no; I fancy none will be so hardy as to dispute it
with a Champion like him, inured to arms; and we shall
probably see him prancing unmolested away, holding his
bridle thus in one hand, and brandishing his dram-cup in
the other."
Some men have a manner of describing, which only wraps
the subject in more than former obscurity; thus I was
unable, with all my companion's volubility, to form a dis-
tinct idea of the intended procession. I was certain that
the inauguration of a king should be conducted with
solemnity and religious awe ; and I could not be persuaded
that there was much solemnity in this description. " If
this be true," cried I to myself, " the people of Europe
surely have a strange manner of mixing solemn and fan-
tastic images together; pictures, at once replete with bur-
lesque and the sublime. At a time when the king enters
into the most solemn compact with his people, nothing,
surely, should be admitted to diminish from the real ma-
jesty of the ceremony. A ludicrous image, brought in at
such a time, throws an air of ridicule upon the whole. It
someway resembles a picture I have seen, designed by
Albert Durer, where, amidst all the solemnity of that
awful scene, a deity judging, and a trembling world await-
ing the decree, he has introduced a merry mortal trundling
his scolding wife to hell in a wheel-barrow."
<pb>
My companion, who mistook my silence, during this in-
terval of reflection, for the rapture of astonishment, pro-
ceeded to describe those frivolous parts of the show that
most struck his imagination ; and to assure me, that if I
stayed in this country some months longer, I should see
fine things. " For my own part," continued he, " I know
already of fifteen suits of clothes, that would stand on one
end with gold lace, all designed to be first shown there;
and as for diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and pearls, we shall
see them as thick as brass nails in a sedan chair. And then
we are all to walk so majestically thus ; this foot always
behind the foot before. The ladies are to fling nosegays ;
the court poets to scatter verses ; the spectators are to be
all in full dress ; Mrs. Tibbs in a new sack, ruffles, and
Frenched hair: look where you will, one thing finer than
another; Mrs. Tibbs curtsies to the Duchess; her Grace
returns the compliment with a bow. ' Largess !' cries the
Herald. ' Make room!' cries the Gentleman Usher.
' Knock him down!' cries the guard. Ah !" continued he,
amazed at his own description, "what an astonishing scene1
of grandeur can Art produce from the smallest circum-
stance, when it thus actually turns to wonder one man
putting on another man's hat! " 2
I now found his mind was entirely set upon the fopperies
of the pageant, and quite regardless of the real meaning of
such costly preparations. " Pageants," says Bacon, " are
pretty things; but we should rather study to make them
elegant than expensive." Processions, cavalcades, and all
that fund of gay frippery, furnished out by tailors, barbers,
and tirewomen, mechanically influence the mind into
veneration. An emperor in his nightcap would not meet
with half the respect of an emperor with a glittering crown.
Politics resemble religion; attempting to divest either of
ceremony is the most certain method of bringing either
into contempt. The weak must have their inducements to
admiration as well as the wise; and it is the business of a
sensible government to impress all ranks with a sense of
1 The third edition has " scenee," which is probably a misprint for
" scene," the word appearing in the other early editions.—ED.
2 Otherwise, the Primate putting on the King's crown at the corona-
tion. Goldsmith here invests the silly Beau with his own wit.—ED.
<pb>
subordination, whether this be effected by a diamond
buckle, or a virtuous edict, a sumptuary law, or a glass
necklace.
This interval of reflection only gave my companion spirits
to begin his description afresh; and, as a greater induce-
ment to raise my curiosity, he informed me of the vast
sums that were given by the spectators for places. " That
the ceremony must be fine," cries he, " is very evident from
the fine price that is paid for seeing it. Several ladies
have assured me, they could willingly part with one eye
rather than be prevented from looking on with the other.
Come, come," continues he, " I have a friend, who, for my
sake, will supply us with places at the most reasonable
rates; I'll take care you shall not be imposed upon; and
he will inform you of the use, finery, rapture, splendour,
and enchantment of the whole ceremony, better than L"
Follies often repeated lose their absurdity, and assume
the appearance of reason. His arguments were so often
and so strongly enforced, that I had actually some thoughts
of becoming a spectator. We accordingly went together to
bespeak a place; but guess my surprise when the man
.demanded a purse of gold for a single seat! I could hardly
believe him serious upon making the demand. " Prithee,
friend," cried I, "after I have paid twenty pounds for sitting
here an hour or two, can I bring a part of the coronation
back ? "—" No, Sir."—" How long can I live upon it, after
I have come away?"—"Not long, Sir."—"Can a corona-
tion clothe, feed, or fatten me ? "—." Sir," replied the man,
" you seem to be under a mistake ; all that you can bring
away is the pleasure of having it to say, that you saw the
coronation."—" Blast me ! " cries Tibbs, " if that be all,
there is no need of paying for that, since I am resolved to
have that pleasure, whether I am there or no ! "
I am conscious, my friend, that this is but a very con-
fused description of the intended ceremony. You may
object, that I neither settle rank, precedency, nor place;
that I seem ignorant whether Gules walks before or behind
Garter; that I have neither mentioned the dimensions of
a lord's cap, nor measured the length of a lady's tail. I
know your delight is in minute description: and this I am
unhappily disqualified from furnishing; yet, upon the
<pb>
whole, I fancy it will be no way comparable to the magni-
ficence of our late Emperor Whangti's procession, when he
was married to the moon, at which Fum Hoam himself
presided in person.1 Adieu.
LETTER CVI.
To the Same.
FUNERAL ELEGIES WRITTEN UPON THE GREAT RIDICULED.
A SPECIMEN OF ONE.2
IT was formerly the custom here, when men of distinc-
tion died, for their surviving acquaintance to throw each a,
slight present into the grave. Several things of little value
were made use of for that purpose,—perfumes, relics,
spices, bitter herbs, camomile, wormwood, and verses. This
custom, however, is almost discontinued, and nothing but
verses alone are now lavished on such occasions;3 an obla-
tion which they suppose may be interred with the dead,
without any injury to the living.
Upon the death of the great, therefore, the poets and
undertakers are sure of employment. While one provides
the long cloat, black staff, and mourning coach, the other
produces the pastoral or elegy, the monody or apotheosis.
The nobility need be under no apprehensions, but die as
fast as they think proper, the poet and undertaker are
ready to supply them; these can find metaphorical tears
and family escutcheons at an hour's warning; and when
the one has soberly laid the body in the grave, the other is
ready to fix it figuratively among the stars.
There are several ways of being poetically sorrowful on
1 Our author published three other essays upon this coronation, viz.,
two in the 'Essays' (second edition, 1766, see our vol. i., pp. 304 and
307). and one now given in our vol. iv.—ED.
2 Dated March 4, 1761, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
3 The Ledger has in addition here: " When a Tartar dies, his bow,
his horse, and all his worldly possessions are buried with him : the wiser
English, however, threw nothing but poetry into the grave; an oblation,"
&c.—ED.
<pb>
such occasions. The bard is now some pensive youth of
science, who sits deploring among the tombs; again, he is
Thyrsis, complaining in a circle of harmless sheep. Now
Britannia sits upon her own shore, and gives a loose to
maternal tenderness ; at another time, Parnassus, even the
mountain Parnassus, gives way to sorrow, and is bathed in
tears of distress.
But the most usual manner is this: Damon meets
Menalcas, who has got a most gloomy countenance. The
shepherd asks his friend, whence that look of distress ? To
which the other replies, that Pollio is no more. " If that
be the case, then," cries Damon, " let us retire to yonder
bower at some distance off, where the cypress and the jes-
samine add fragrance to the breeze; and let us weep alter-
nately for Pollio, the friend of shepherds, and the patron
of every muse."—" Ah ! " returns his fellow shepherd,
" what think you rather of that grotto by the fountain
side ? the murmuring stream will help to assist our com-
plaints, and a nightingale on a neighbouring tree will join
her voice to the concert! " When the place is thus settled,
they begin: the brook stands still to hear their lamenta-
tions ; the cows forget to graze ; and the very tigers start
from the forest with sympathetic concern. By the tombs
of our ancestors, my dear Fum, I am quite unaffected in all
this distress : the whole is liquid laudanum to my spirits ;
and a tiger of common sensibility has twenty times more
tenderness than I.
But though I could never weep with the complaining
shepherd, yet I am sometimes induced to pity the poet,
whose trade is thus to make demigods and heroes for a
dinner. There is not in nature a more dismal figure than
a man who sits down to premeditated flattery: every stanza
he writes tacitly reproaches the meanness of his occupa-
tion, till, at last, his stupidity becomes more stupid, and
his dullness more diminutive.
I am amazed, therefore, that none have yet found out
the secret of flattering the worthless, and yet of preserving
a safe conscience. I have often wished for some method,
by which a man might do himself and his deceased patron
justice, without being under the hateful reproach of self
conviction. After long lucubration, I have hit upon such
<pb>
an expedient; and send you the specimen of a poem upon
the decease of a great man, in which the flattery is perfectly
fine, and yet the poet perfectly innocent.1
ON THE DEATH OF THE KIGHT HONOURABLE * * *
Ye Muses, pour the pitying tear
For Pollio snatch'd away;
Oh, had he lived another year!
—He had not died to-day.
O, were he born to bless mankind
In virtuous times of yore,
Heroes themselves had fall'n behind !
— Whene'er he went before.
How sad the groves and plains appear,
And sympathetic sheep;
Ev'n pitying hills would drop a tear !
—If hills could learn to weep.
His bounty in exalted strain
Each bard may well display ;
Since none implor'd relief in vain !
—That went reliev'd away.
And hark ! I hear the tuneful throng
His obsequies forbid;
He still shall live, shall live as long
—As ever dead man did."
LETTER CVII.
To the Same.
THE ENGLISH TOO FOND OF BELIEVING EVERY REPORT
WITHOUT EXAMINATION. A STORY OF AN INCENDIARY
IT is the most usual method, in every report, first to
examine its probability, and then act as the conjuncture
1 The author has repeated the conceit of the first two stanzas in his
' Elegy on the Death of a Mad Dog,' and ' Elegy on Mrs. Mary Blaize.'
See vol. ii., pp. 81, 89. The similarity of the structure of this piece of
verse with that of the two poems mentioned will also be observed.—ED.
1 Dated Feb. 20, 1761, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
may require. The English, however, exert a different
spirit in such circumstances : they first act, and, when too
late, begin to examine. From a knowledge of this disposi-
tion, there are several here who make it their business to
frame new reports at every convenient interval, all tending
to denounce ruin both on their contemporaries and their
posterity. This denunciation is eagerly caught up by the
public: away they fling to propagate the distress; sell out
at one place, buy in at another, grumble at their governors,
shout in mobs, and, when they have thus for some time
behaved like fools, sit down coolly to argue and talk
wisdom, to puzzle each other with syllogism, and prepare
for the next report that prevails, which is always attended
with the same success.
Thus are they ever rising above one report, only to sink
into another. They resemble a dog in a well, pawing to
get free. When he has raised his upper parts above
water, and every spectator imagines him disengaged, his
lower parts drag him down again, and sink him to the
nose; he makes new efforts to emerge, and every effort,
increasing his weakness, only tends to sink him the
deeper.
There are some here who, I am told, make a tolerable
subsistence by the credulity of their countrymen. As they
find the public fond of blood, wounds, and death, they
contrive political ruins suited to every month in the year.
This month the people are to be eaten up by the French in
flat bottomed boats ; the next, by the soldiers designed to
beat the French back. Now the people are going to jump
down the gulf of luxury ; and now nothing but a herring
subscription1 can fish them up again. Time passes on;
the report proves false; new circumstances produce new
changes; but the people never change,—they are perse-
vering in folly.
In other countries, those boding politicians would be left
to fret over their own schemes alone, and grow splenetic
without hopes of infecting others; but England seems to
1 Herring subscription,—In allusion to the " herring mania," and the
subscription of ,£500,000 for the promotion, by bounties and other means,
of British fisheries, a project which failed signally. Lockman, mentioned
at p. 397, was secretary to this scheme.—ED.
III. C C
-
<pb>
be the very region where spleen delights to dwell; a man
not only can give an unbounded scope to the disorder in
himself, but may, if he pleases, propagate it over the whole
kingdom, with a certainty of success. He has only to cry
out that the government, the government is all wrong;
that their schemes are leading to ruin ; that Britons are no
more: every good member of the commonwealth thinks it
his duty, in such a case, to deplore the universal decadence
with sympathetic sorrow, and, by fancying the constitution
in a decay, absolutely to impair its vigour.
This people would laugh at my simplicity, should I
advise them to be less sanguine in harbouring gloomy pre-
dictions, and examine coolly before they attempted to com-
plain. I have just heard a story, which, though transacted
in a private family, serves very well to describe the beha-
viour of the whole nation, in cases of threatened calamity.
As there are public, so there are private incendiaries here.
One of the last, either for the amusement of his friends, or
to divert a fit of the spleen, lately sent a threatening
letter to a worthy family in my neighbourhood, to this
effect:—
" SIB,—Knowing you to be very rich, and finding myself
to be very poor, I think proper to inform you, that I have
learned the secret of poisoning man, woman, and child,
without danger of detection. Don't be uneasy, Sir, you
may take your choice of being poisoned in a fortnight, or
poisoned in a month, or poisoned in six weeks; you shall
have full time to settle all your affairs. Though I am
poor, I love to do things like a gentleman. But, Sir, you
must die; I have determined it within my own breast that
you must die. Blood, Sir, blood is my trade! so I could
wish you would, this day six weeks, take leave of your
friends, wife, and family, for I cannot possibly allow you
longer time. To convince you more certainly of the power
of my art, by which you may know I speak truth, take
this letter ; when you have read it, tear off the seal, fold it
up, and give it to your favourite Dutch mastiff that sits by
the fire; he will swallow it, Sir, like a butter'd toast: in
three hours four minutes after he has taken it, he will
attempt to bite off his own tongue, and, half an hour after,
burst asunder in twenty pieces. Blood, blood, blood! So
<pb>
no more at present from, Sir, your most obedient, most
devoted humble servant to command, till death." '
You may easily imagine the consternation into which
this letter threw the whole good-natured family. The
poor man to whom it was addressed was the more sur-
prised, as not knowing how he could merit such inveterate
malice. All the friends of the family were convened; it
was universally agreed that it was a most terrible affair,
and that the government should be solicited to offer a
reward and a pardon : a fellow of this kind would go on
poisoning family after family; and it was impossible to
say where the destruction would end. In pursuance of
these determinations, the government was applied to;
strict search was made after the incendiary, but all in vain.
At last, therefore, they recollected that the experiment was
not yet tried upon the dog. The Dutch mastiff was
brought up, and placed in the midst of the friends and
relations, the seal was torn off, the packet folded up with
care, and soon they found, to the great surprise of all—
that the dog would not eat the letter.2 Adieu.
LETTER CVHI.
To the Same.
THE UTILITY AND ENTERTAINMENT THAT MIGHT RESULT
FROM A JOURNEY INTO THE EAST.3
I HAVE frequently been amazed at the ignorance of
almost all the European travellers who have penetrated
any considerable way eastward into Asia. They have been
influenced either by motives of commerce or piety; and
1 In the Public Ledger this letter is signed " Ebenezer Scragg."—ED.
2 The Ledger version has the following in addition:—" They should
have first tried the experiment before they had petitioned the king."—ED.
3 Afterwards reprinted as No. XVIII. of the ' Essays.' Prior traces
the leading idea of this Letter to the review by Goldsmith of Van Egmont
and Hayman's travels, in the Critical Review of June, 1759 ; which re-
view will be found in our vol. iv. The date of this Letter in the Public
Ledger is Feb. 27, 1761.—ED.
<pb>
their accounts are such as might reasonably be expected
from men of very narrow or very prejudiced education, the
dictates of superstition, or the result of ignorance. Is it
not surprising, that in such a variety of adventurers not
one single philosopher should be found? for, as to the
travels of Gemelli,1 the learned are long agreed that the
whole is but an imposture.
There is scarce any country, how rude or uncultivated
soever, where the inhabitants are not possessed of some
peculiar secrets either in nature or art, which might be
transplanted with success. In Siberian Tartary, for in-
stance, the natives extract a strong spirit from milk, which
is a secret probably unknown to the chemists of Europe.
In the most savage parts of India, they are possessed of
the secret of dyeing vegetable substances scarlet; and of
refining lead into a metal, which, for hardness and colour,
is little inferior to silver ; not one of which secrets but
would, in Europe, make a man's fortune. The power of
the Asiatics in producing winds, or bringing down rain,
the Europeans are apt to treat as fabulous, because they
have no instances of the like nature among themselves; but
they would have treated the secrets of gunpowder, and the
mariner's compass, in the same manner, had they been told
the Chinese used such arts before the invention was
common with themselves at home.
Of all the English philosophers, I most reverence Bacon,
that great and hardy genius. He it is who 2 allows of
secrets yet unknown; who,2 undaunted by the seeming
difficulties that oppose, prompts human curiosity to examine
every part of nature, and even exhorts man to try, whether
he cannot subject the tempest, the thunder, and even,
earthquakes, to human control. O, did a man of his
daring spirit, of his genius, penetration, and learning,
travel to those countries which have been visited only by
the superstitious and the mercenary, what might not man-
1 Gemelli, of Naples. His ' Voyage Round the World' was published
in 1699. Baron Humboldt has expressed his belief in its genuineness.—
ED.
2-2 Not in the Public Ledger. It is strange that having inserted thia
in the ' Citizen,' in 1762, the author should, as it would seem, cut it
out on reprinting the Letter in the ' Essays,' 1765 and 1766.—ED.
<pb>
kind expect! How would lie enlighten the regions to
which he travelled ! and what a variety of knowledge and
useful improvement would he not bring back in exchange !
There is, probably, no country so barbarous, that would
not disclose all it knew, if it received from the traveller
equivalent information; and I am apt to think, that a
person who was ready to give more knowledge than he
received, would be welcome wherever he came. All his
care in travelling should only be to suit his intellectual
banquet to the people with whom he conversed; he should
not attempt to teach the unlettered Tartar astronomy; nor
yet instruct the polite Chinese in the ruder arts of sub-
sistence. He should endeavour to improve the barbarian
in the secrets of living comfortably; and the inhabitant of
a more refined country in the speculative pleasures of
science. How much more nobly would a philosopher thus
employed spend his time, than by sitting at home earnestly
intent upon adding one star more to his catalogue, or one
monster more to his collection; or still, if possible, more
triflingly sedulous, in the incatenation of fleas, or the
sculpture of a cherry-stone !
I never consider this subject without being surprised,
that none of those societies l so laudably established in
England for the promotion of arts and learning, have ever
thought of sending one of their members into the most
eastern parts of Asia, to make what discoveries he was
able.2 To be convinced of the utility of such an under-
taking, let them but read the relations of their own travel-
lers. It will be there found, that they are as often deceived
themselves, as they attempt to deceive others. The mer-
chant tells us, perhaps, the price of different commodities,
1 Such discoveries, however, in different parts of the world, were soon
to be undertaken by the Royal Society, through the energy chiefly of
Sir Joseph Banks and Captain Cook, the Asiatic Society, incited by
Sir William Jones, &c. &c. See note, vol. ii., p. 95.—ED.
2 Goldsmith himself seriously entertained the design of putting this
project in execution, and applied to Lord Bute with the hope of interest-
ing government in his scheme; but his memorial was neglected. See
' Life,' pp. 25-26. According to Prior (' Life,' i., 386), Dr. Farr said
that Goldsmith entertained a similar idea in 1756, immediately after
his return from the continent. The project then had the form of a
journey to the Weitten mountains, the region afterwards (1762-3)
traversed by Edward Wortley Montague.—ED.
<pb>
the methods of baling them up, and the properest manner
for a European to preserve his health in the country. The
missioner, on the other hand, informs us, with what plea-
sure the country to which he was sent embraced Chris-
tianity, and the numbers he converted; what methods he
took to keep Lent in a region where there was no fish; or
the shifts he made to celebrate the rites of his religion, in
places where there was neither bread nor wine. Such
accounts, with the usual appendage of marriages and
funerals, inscriptions, rivers, and mountains, make up the
whole of a European traveller's diary: but as to all the
secrets of which the inhabitants are possessed, those are
universally attributed to magic; and when the traveller
can give no other account of the wonders he sees per-
formed, he very contentedly ascribes them to the power of
the devil.
It was a usual observation of Boyle, the English chemist,
" That if every artist would but discover what new obser-
vations occurred to him in the exercise of his trade, philo-
sophy would thence gain innumerable improvements." It
may be observed, with still greater justice, that if the
useful knowledge of every country, howsoever barbarous,
was gleaned by a judicious observer, the advantages would
be inestimable. Are there not, even in Europe, many useful
inventions known or practised but in one place ? The in-
strument, as an example, for cutting down corn in Ger-
many,1 is much more handy and expeditious, in my opinion,
than the sickle used in England. The cheap and expedi-
tious manner of making vinegar, without previous fermen-
tation, is known only in a part of France. If such discoveries,
therefore, remain still to be known at home, what funds oi
knowledge might not be collected in countries yet unex-
plored, or only passed through by ignorant travellers in
hasty caravans ?
The caution with which foreigners are received in Asia
may be alleged as an objection to such a design. But how
readily have several European merchants found admission
into regions the most suspecting, under the character of
1 The Hainault scythe, Mr. Charles Knight says, which an English
writer on agriculture, Martin Doyle, has even in our own day vainly tried
to get into use.—ED.
<pb>
Sanjapim, or northern pilgrims. To such, not even China
itself denies access.
To send out a traveller, properly qualified for these pur-
poses, might be an object of national concern : it would in
some measure repair the breaches made by ambition; and
might show that there were still some who boasted a greater
name than that of patriots, who professed themselves lovers
of men. The only difficulty would remain in choosing a
proper person for so arduous an enterprise. He should be
a man of a philosophical turn ; one apt to deduce conse-
quences of general utility from particular occurrences;
neither swollen with pride, nor hardened by prejudice;
neither wedded to one particular system, nor instructed
only in one particular science; neither wholly a botanist,
nor quite an antiquarian; his mind should be tinctured
with miscellaneous knowledge, and his manner humanized
by an intercourse with men. He should be, in some mea-
sure, an enthusiast in the design; fond of travelling, from
a rapid imagination and an innate love of change; furnished
with a body capable of sustaining every fatigue, and a heart
not easily terrified at danger.1 Adieu.
1 Here we seem to have a not altogether untrue picture of Gold-
smith himself as the " proper person." Johnson's ridicule of our author's
pretensions as regards an expedition of discovery of this kind are quoted
in our ' Life' (vOl. i., p. 26) ., yet thirteen years later than the date of
the above, viz., in March, 1774, we find Johnson writing to Warren
Hastings, the Governor-General of India, as follows :—" You, Sir, have
no need of being told by me how much may be added by your attention
to experimental knowledge and natural history. There are arts of
manufacture practised in the countries in which you preside, which are
yet very imperfectly known here, either to artificers or philosophers.
Of the natural productions, animate and inanimate, we yet have so little
intelligence, that our books are filled, I fear, with conjectures about
things which an Indian peasant knows by his senses. Many of those
things my first wish is to see; my second to know, by such accounts as a
man like you will be able to give." Vide Boswell's ' Life of Johnson,'
Napier's 8vo ed., vol. iii., p. 197.—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE CIX.
To the Same.
THE CHINESE PHILOSOPHER ATTEMPTS TO FIND OUT
FAMOUS MEN.1
ONE of the principal tasks I had proposed to myself on
my arrival here, was to become acquainted with the names
and characters of those now living, who, as scholars or wits,
had acquired the greatest share of reputation. In order to
succeed in this design, I fancied the surest method would
be to begin my enquiry among the ignorant, judging that
his fame would be greatest which was loud enough to be
heard by the vulgar. Thus predisposed, I began the search,
but only went in quest of disappointment and perplexity.
I found every district had a peculiar famous man of its
own. Here the story-telling shoemaker had engrossed the
admiration on one side of the street, while the bellman, who
excelleth at a catch, was in quiet possession of the other.
At one end of a lane the sexton2 was regarded as the greatest
man alive; but I had not travelled half its length, till I
found an enthusiast teacher had divided his reputation. My
landlady, perceiving my design, was kind enough to offer me
her advice in this affair. It was true, she observed, that
she was no judge, but she knew what pleased herself, and,
if I would rest upon her judgment, I should set down Tom
Collins as the most ingenious man in the world; for Tom
was able to take off all mankind, and imitate besides a sow
and pigs to perfection.
I now perceived, that taking my standard of reputation
among the vulgar, would swell my catalogue of great
names above the size of a Court Calendar; I therefore
discontinued this method of pursuit, and resolved to pro-
secute my enquiry in that usual residence of fame, a book-
seller's shop. In consequence of this, I entreated the book-
seller to let me know who were they who now made the
1 Dated March 18, 1761, in the Public Ledger.—En.
2 The Ledger has, " the Parson."—ED.
<pb>
greatest figure, either in morals, wit, or learning. Without
giving me a direct answer, he pulled a pamphlet from the
shelf, The Young Attorney's Guide: " There, Sir," cries he,
" there is a touch for you; fifteen hundred of these moved
off in a day: I take the author of this pamphlet, either for
title, preface, plan, body, or index, to be the completest
hand in England." I found it was vain to prosecute my
enquiry, where my informer appeared so incompetent a
judge of merit; so, paying for the Young Attorney's Guide,
which good manners obliged me to buy, I walked off.
My pursuit after famous men now brought me into a
print-shop. " Here," thought I, " the painter only reflects
the public voice. As every man who deserved it had for-
merly his statue placed up in the Roman forum, so here,
probably, the pictures of none but such as merit a place in
our affections are held up for public sale." But guess my
surprise, when I came to examine this depository of noted
faces ! All distinctions were levelled here, as in the grave,
and I could not but regard it as the catacomb of real
merit: the brick-dust man took up as much room as the
truncheoned hero, and the judge was elbowed by the thief-
taker; quacks, pimps, and buffoons increased the group,
and noted stallions only made room for more noted whores.
I had read the works of some of the moderns previous to
my coming to England, with delight and approbation; but
I found their faces had no place here; the walls were
covered with the names of authors I had never known, or
had endeavoured to forget,—with the little self-advertising
things of a day, who had forced themselves into fashion,
but not into fame. I could read at the bottom of some
pictures the names of * *, and * * *, and * * * *, all
equally candidates for the vulgar shout, and foremost to
propagate their unblushing faces upon brass. My uneasi-
ness, therefore, at not finding my few favourite names
among the number, was now changed into congratulation.
I could not avoid reflecting on the fine observation of
Tacitus on a similar occasion. " In this cavalcade of
flattery," cries the historian, " neither the pictures . of
Brutus, Cassius, nor Cato, were to be seen; eo clariores
quia imagines eorum non deferabantur;" their absence
being the strongest proof of their merit.
<pb>
"It is in vain," cried I, "to seek for true greatness
among these monuments of the unburied dead : let me go
among the tombs of those who are confessedly famous, and
see if any have been lately deposited there, who deserve
the attention of posterity, and whose names may be trans-
mitted to my distant friend, as an honour to the present
age." Determined in my pursuit, I paid a second visit to
Westminster Abbey. There I found several new monu-
ments, erected to the memory of several great men; the
names of the great men I absolutely forget, but I well re-
member that Roubillac was the statuary who carved them.
I could not help smiling at two modern epitaphs in parti-
cular, one of which praised the deceased for being ortus ex
antiqud stirpe: the other commended the dead because Tianc
cedem suis sumptibus re&dificavit. The greatest merit of
one consisted in his being descended from an illustrious
house; the chief distinction of the other, that he had
propped up an old house that was falling. " Alas ! alas !"
cried I, " such monuments as these confer honour, not
upon the great men, but upon little Eoubillac." l
Hitherto disappointed in my enquiry after the great of
the present age, I was resolved to mix in company, and try
what I could learn among critics in coffeehouses; and
here it was that I heard my favourite names talked of even
with inverted fame. A gentleman of exalted merit as a
writer, was branded in general terms as a bad man;
another of exquisite delicacy as a poet, was reproached for
wanting good nature; a third was accused of free-think-
ing; and a fourth of having once been a player. "Strange,"
cried I, " how unjust are mankind in the distribution of
fame! the ignorant, among whom I sought at first, were
wining to grant, but incapable of distinguishing the virtues
of those who deserved it; among those I now converse
with, they know the proper objects of admiration, but mix
envy with applause."
Disappointed so often, I was now resolved to examine
those characters in person of whom the world talked so
1 An acquaintance with the person of the sculptor seems implied by
this passage; a matter on which there exists doubts, although asserted
by Sir John Hawkins, who relates a trick of Boubillac on Goldsmith.—
PBIOB. [See ' Life' in our vol. i. p. 13.—ED.]
<pb>
freely. 1 By conversing with men of real merit, I began to
find out those characters which really deserved, though
they strove to avoid applause. I found the vulgar admi-
ration entirely misplaced, and malevolence without its
sting.1 The truly great, possessed of numerous small faults,
and shining virtues, preserve a sublime in morals as in
writing. They who have attained an excellence in either,
commit numberless transgressions, observable to the
meanest understanding. The ignorant critic and dull
remarker can readily spy blemishes in eloquence or morals,
whose sentiments are not sufficiently elevated to observe a
beauty. But such are judges neither of books nor of life ;
they can diminish no solid reputation by their censure, nor
bestow a lasting character by their applause. In short, I
found by my search, that such only can confer real fame
upon others, who have merit themselves to deserve it.—
Adieu.
LETTEE CX.
To ike Same.
SOME PROJECTS FOR INTRODUCING ASIATIC EMPLOY-
MENTS INTO THE COURTS OF ENGLAND.2
THERE are numberless employments in the courts of the
Eastern monarchs utterly unpractised and unknown in
Europe. They have no such officers, for instance, as the
emperor's ear-tickler, or tooth-picker; they have never in-
troduced at the courts, the mandarine appointed to bear
the royal tobacco-box, or the grave director of the imperial
exercitations in the seraglio. Yet I am surprised that the
English have imitated us in none of these particulars, as they
l-1 This passage is not in the Ledger. Instead, we have the previous
sentence continued thus:—"just what I expected was the result of my
search, I found the truly great," &c. The allusion in the added portion
to "conversing with men of real merit," is thought to apply more par-
ticularly to Dr. Johnson, whose acquaintance Goldsmith was just at this
time, 1760-61, beginning to make. See ' Life,' p. 20.—ED.
2 ? Courts of Europe. The date of this letter in the Public Ledger is
May 1, 1761.—ED.
<pb>
are generally pleased with every thing that comes from
China, and excessively fond of creating new and useless
employments. They have filled their houses with our
furniture, their public gardens with our fireworks, and
their very ponds with our fish.1 Our courtiers, my friend,
are the fish and the furniture they should have imported ;
our courtiers would fill up the necessary ceremonies of a
court better than those of Europe; would be contented
with receiving large salaries for doing little ; whereas some
of this country are at present discontented though they
receive large salaries for doing nothing.
I lately, therefore, had thoughts of publishing a pro-
posal here, for the admission of some new Eastern offices
and titles into their Court Register. As I consider myself
in the light of a cosmopolite, I find as much satisfaction in
scheming for the countries in which I happen to reside, as
for that in which I was born.2
The finest apartments in the palace of Pegu are fre-
quently infested with rats. These the religion of the
country strictly forbids the people to kill. In such circum-
stances, therefore, they are obliged to have recourse to
some great man of the court, who is willing to free the
royal apartment, even at the hazard of his salvation.
After a weak monarch's reign, the quantity of court vermin
in every part of the palace is surprising; but a prudent
king, and a vigilant officer, soon drive them from their
sanctuaries behind the mats and tapestry, and effectually
free the court. Such an officer in England would, in my
opinion, be serviceable at this juncture ; for if, as I am
told, the palace be old, much vermin must undoubtedly
have taken refuge behind the wainscot and hangings. A
minister should therefore be invested with the title and
dignities of Court Vermin-killer; he should have full
1 The gold fish, now so common in many of our English streams, were
brought originally from China.—B.
2 Here the Ledger version has in addition :—" I, however, have discon-
tinued the design, being apprehensive it might be ascribed to mercenary
motives. Yet my conscience can bear witness that I am quite disinte-
rested, and tho' in the first place, I have taken some pains to prove the
necessity of a Court vermin-killer here, as in Pegu, yet be assured I am
not much desirous of the title or employment, either for myself or my
family."—ED.
<pb>
power either to banish, take, poison, or destroy them, with
enchantments, traps, ferrets, or ratsbane. He might be
permitted to brandish his besom without remorse, and
brush down every part of the furniture, without sparing a
single cobweb, however sacred by long prescription. I
communicated this proposal some days ago in a company
of the first distinction, and enjoying the most honourable
offices of the state. Among the number were the Inspector
of Great Britain, Mr. Henriques1 the director of the
ministry, Ben. Victor2 the treasurer,3 John Lockman the
secretary,3 and the conductor of the Imperial magazine.
They all acquiesced in the utility of my proposal, but were
apprehensive it might meet with some obstructions from
court upholsterers and chambermaids, who would object to
it from the demolition of the furniture, and the dangerous
use of ferrets and ratsbane.
My next proposal is rather more general than the former,
and might probably meet with less opposition. Though
no people in the world natter each other more than the
English, I know none who understand the art less, and
flatter with such little refinement. Their panegyric, like a
Tartar feast, is indeed served up with profusion, but their
cookery is insupportable. A client here shall dress up a
fricassee for his patron, that shall offend an ordinary nose
before it enters the room. A town shall send up their
address to a great minister, which shall prove at once a
satire on the minister and themselves. If the favourite of
the day sits, or stands, or sleeps, there are poets to put it
into verse, and priests to preach it in the pulpit. In order,
therefore, to free both those who praise, and those who are
praised, from a duty probably disagreeable to both,' I
would constitute professed flatterers here, as in several courts
1 A speculator of the day. His lotteries and schemes were often adver-
tised in the Public Ledger, where he used to sign himself, " Jacob Hen-
riques, born 1683," apparently on the plan of the tradesmen who state
when their businesses were " established." See also Essay on ' Female
Warriors ' in vol. iv.—ED.
2 Treasurer at Drury Lane Theatre. He also published a History of
the Theatres of London and Dublin, 1761-71, and some plays.—En.
3-3 The name is not in the Ledger. Lockman was the conductor of a
magazine, and also secretary and hack writer to the Herring Fishery
'scheme and similar affairs. See ' Bee,' vol. i. p. 417.—ED.
<pb>
of India. These are appointed in the courts of their
princes, to instruct the people where to exclaim with admi-
ration, and where to lay an emphasis of praise. But an
officer of this kind is always in waiting when the emperor
converses in a familiar manner among his rajahs and other
nobility. At every sentence, when the monarch pauses,
and smiles at what he has been saying, the Karamat-man,
as this officer is called, is to take it for granted that his
majesty has said a good thing. Upon which he cries out
—" Karamat! Karamat!—a miracle! a miracle! " and
throws up his hands and his eyes in extasy. This is
echoed by the courtiers around, while the emperor sits all
this time in sullen satisfaction, enjoying the triumph of
his joke, or studying a new repartee.
I would have such an officer placed at every great man's
table in England. By frequent practice, he might soon
become a perfect master of the art, and in time would turn
out pleasing to his patron, no way troublesome to himself,
and might prevent the nauseous attempts of many more
ignorant pretenders. The clergy here, I am convinced,
would relish this proposal. It would provide places for
several of them. And, indeed, by some of their late pro-
ductions, many appear to have qualified themselves as can-
didates for this office already.
But my last proposal I take to be of the utmost impor-
tance. Our neighbour, the empress of Eussia, has, you
may remember, instituted an order of female knighthood ;l
the empress of Germany has also instituted another; the
Chinese have had such an order time immemorial. I am
amazed the English have never come into such an institu-
tion. When I consider what kind of men are made
knights here, it appears strange that they have never con-
ferred this honour upon women. They make cheese-
mongers and pastry-cooks knights ; then, why not their
wives ? They have called up tallow chandlers to maintain
the hardy profession of chivalry and arms; then, why not
their wives ? Haberdashers are sworn, as I suppose all
knights must be sworn, never to fly in time of mellay or
battle, to maintain and uphold the noble estate of Chivalry,
1 The order of St. Catherine, instituted by Peter the Great in honour
of his wife Catherine. See ante, p. 237.—ED.
<pb>
with horse, harnishe, and other Knightlye habiliments. Haber-
dashers, I say, are sworn to all this; then, why not their
wives ? Certain I am, their wives understand fighting and
feats of mellay and battle better than they; and as for
knightlye horse and harnishe, it is probable both know
nothing more than the harness of a one horse chaise. No,
no, my friend, instead of conferring any order upon the
husbands, I would knight their wives. However, the state
should not be troubled with a new institution upon this
occasion. Some ancient exploded order might be revived,
which would furnish both a motto and a name,—the ladies
might be permitted to choose for themselves. There are,
for instance, the obsolete orders of the Dragon in Germany,
of the Rue in Scotland, and the Porcupine in France,—all
well sounding names, and very applicable to my intended
female institution. Adieu.
LETTER CXI.
To the Same.
ON THE DIFFERENT SECTS IN ENGLAND, PARTICULARLY
METHODISTS.1
RELIGIOUS sects in England are far more numerous than
in China. Every man who has interest enough to hire a
conventicle here, may set up for himself, and sell off a new
religion. The sellers of the newest pattern, at present,
give extreme good bargains ; and let their disciples have a
great deal of confidence for very little money.2
Their shops are much frequented, and their customers
every day increasing; for people are naturally fond of
going to Paradise at as small expense as possible.
Yet you must not conceive this modern sect as differing
1 The original editions have " Methodism." The date of this letter in
the Public Ledgeris March 11, 1761.—ED.
8 The author alludes to the Methodists. This sect, which originated
with some students at Oxford, about thirty years before, had already
become extremely numerous in England.—B.
<pb>
in opinion from those of the established religion ; difference
of opinion, indeed, formerly divided their sectaries, and
sometimes drew their armies to the field. White gowns
and black mantles, flapped hats and cross pocket-holes,
were once the obvious causes of quarrel; men then had
some reason for fighting; they knew what they fought
about; but at present they are arrived to such refinement
in religion-making, that they have actually formed a new
sect without a new opinion ; they quarrel for opinions they
both equally defend ; they hate each other, and that is all
the difference between them.
But though their principles are the same, their practice is
somewhat different. Those of the established religion laugh
when they are pleased, and their groans are seldom extorted
but by pain or danger. The new sect, on the contrary, weep
for their amusement, and use little music, except a chorus
of sighs and groans, or tunes that are made to imitate
groaning. Laughter is their aversion; lovers court each
other from the Lamentations; the bridegroom approaches
the nuptial couch in sorrowful solemnity, and the bride
looks more dismal than an undertaker's shop. Dancing
round the room is, with them, running in a direct line to
the devil; and as for gaming, though but in jest, they
would sooner play with a rattlesnake's tail than finger a
dice-box.
By this time, you perceive that I am describing a sect of
enthusiasts, and you have already compared them with the
Faquirs, Bramins, and Talapoins of the East. Among
these, you know, are generations that have never been
known to smile, and voluntary affliction makes up all the
merit they can boast of. Enthusiasms in every country
produce the same effects: stick the Faquir with pins, or
confine the Bramin to a vermin hospital; spread the
Talapoin on the ground, or load the sectary's brow with
contrition—those worshippers who discard the light of
reason are ever gloomy: their fears increase in proportion
to their ignorance, as men are continually under apprehen-
sions who walk in darkness.
Yet there is still a stronger reason for the enthusiast's
being an enemy to laughter; namely, his being himself so
proper an object of ridicule. It is remarkable, that the
<pb>
propagators of false doctrines have ever been averse to
mirth, and always begin by recommending gravity, when
they intended to disseminate imposture. Fohi, the idol of
China, is represented as having never laughed; Zoroaster,
the leader of the Bramins, is said to have laughed but
twice,—upon his coming into the world, and upon his
leaving it; and Mahomet himself, though a lover of plea-
sure, was a professed opposer of gaiety. Upon a certain
occasion, telling his followers that they would all appear
naked at the resurrection, his favourite wife represented
such an assembly as immodest and unbecoming.—"Foolish
woman! " cried the grave prophet, "though the whole as-
sembly be naked, on that day they shall have forgotten to
laugh." Men like him opposed ridicule, because they knew
it to be a most formidable antagonist, and preached up
gravity, to conceal their own want of importance.
Eidicule has ever been the most powerful enemy of en-
thusiasm, and, properly, the only antagonist that can be
opposed to it with success. Persecution only serves to pro-
pagate new religions; they acquire fresh vigour beneath the
executioner and the axe ; and, like some vivacious insects,
multiply by dissection. It is also impossible to combat
enthusiasm with reason; for, though it makes a show of
resistance, it soon eludes the pressure, refers you to dis-
tinctions not to be understood, and feelings which it cannot
explain. A man who would endeavour to fix an enthusiast
by argument, might as well attempt to spread quicksilver
with his fingers. The only way to conquer a visionary is
to despise him; the stake, the faggot, and the disputing
doctor, in some measure ennoble the opinions they are
brought to oppose: they are harmless against innovating
pride; contempt alone is truly dreadful. Hunters gene-
rally know the most vulnerable part of the beasts they
pursue, by the care which every animal takes to defend the
side which is weakest: on what side the enthusiast is most
vulnerable may be known by the care which he takes in the
beginning to work his disciples into gravity, and guard them
against the power of ridicule.
When Philip the Second was king of Spain, there was a
contest in Salamanca between two orders of friars for supe-
riority. The legend of one side contained more extra-
III. D D
<pb>
•
ordinary miracles, but the legend of the other was reckoned
most authentic. They reviled each other, as is usual in
disputes of divinity; the people were divided into factions,
and a civil war appeared unavoidable. In order to prevent
such an imminent calamity, the combatants were prevailed
upon to submit their legends to the fiery trial, and that
which came forth untouched by the fire was to have the
victory, and to be honoured with a double share of reve-
rence. Whenever the people flock to see a miracle, it is a
hundred to one but that they see a miracle; incredible,
therefore, were the numbers that were gathered round upon
this occasion. The friars on each side approached, and
confidently threw their respective legends into the flames,
when, lo! to the utter disappointment of all the assembly,
instead of a miracle, both legends were consumed. Nothing
but thus turning both parties into contempt, could have
prevented the effusion of blood. The people now laughed
at their former folly, and wondered why they fell out.
Adieu.
LETTER
To the Same.
AN ELECTION DESCRIBED.1
THE English are at present employed in celebrating a
feast, which becomes general every seventh year ; the par-
liament of the nation being then dissolved, and another
appointed to be chosen. This solemnity falls infinitely short
of our Feast of the Lanterns in magnificence and splendour;
it is also surpassed by others of the East in unanimity and
pure devotion; but no festival in the world can compare
with it for eating. Their eating, indeed, amazes me. Had
I five hundred heads, and were each head furnished with
brains, yet would they all be insufficient to compute the
1 The date in the Public Ledger is April 3, 1761, the day on which
the result of the election for the city of London was declared at the
Guildhall.—ED.
<pb>
number of cows, pigs, geese, and turkeys, which, upon this
occasion, die for the good of their country !
To say the truth, eating seems to make a grand ingredient
in all English parties of zeal, business, or amusement.
When a church is to be built, or an hospital endowed, the
directors assemble, and, instead of consulting upon it, they
eat upon it, by which means the business goes forward
with success. When the poor are to be relieved, the officers
appointed to dole out public charity, assemble and eat upon
it. Nor has it ever been known that they filled the bellies
of the poor, till they had previously satisfied their own.
But in the election of magistrates, the people seem to exceed
all bounds: the merits of a candidate are often measured
by the number of his treats ; his constituents assemble, eat
upon him, and lend their applause, not to his integrity or
sense, but to the quantities of his beef and brandy.
And yet I could forgive this people their plentiful meals
on this occasion, as it is extremely natural for every man to
eat a great deal when he gets it for nothing; but what
amazes me is, that all this good living no way contributes
to improve their good humour. On the contrary, they seem
to lose their temper as they lose their appetites; every
morsel they swallow, and every glass they pour down,
serves to increase their animosity. Many an honest man,
before as harmless as a tame rabbit, when loaded with a
single election dinner, has become more dangerous than a
charged culverin. Upon one of these occasions, I have
actually seen a bloody-minded man-milliner sally forth at
the head of a mob, determined to face a desperate pastry-
cook, who was general of the opposite party.
But you must not suppose they are without a pretext for
thus beating each other. On the contrary, no man here is
so uncivilized as to beat his neighbour without producing
very sufficient reasons.1 One candidate, for instance, treats
with gin, a spirit of their own manufacture; another always
drinks brandy, imported from abroad.1 Brandy is a whole-
l-1 In the Ledger the passage takes this form:—" One part of the
village, for instance, drinks gin, a spirit of their own manufacture;
another always drinks brandy imported from abroad." Perhaps the
.war-tax upon strong beer was really at the bottom of this contest. The
brewers would of course raise the cry against " foreign drams," &c.—ED.
<pb>
some liquor; gin, a liquor wholly their own. This, then,
furnishes an obvious cause of quarrel,—Whether it he
most reasonable to get drunk with gin, or get drunk with
brandy ? The mob meet upon the debate, fight themselves
sober, and then draw off to get drunk again, and charge for
another encounter. So that the English may now properly
be said to be engaged in war; since, while they are sub-
duing their enemies abroad, they are breaking each other's
heads at home.
I lately made an excursion to a neighbouring village, in
order to be a spectator of the ceremonies practised upon
this occasion. I left town in company with three fiddlers,
nine dozen of hams, and a corporation poet, which were
designed as reinforcements to the gin-drinking party. We
entered the town with a very good face; the fiddlers, no
way intimidated by the enemy, kept handling their arms up
the principal street. By this prudent manoeuvre, they took
peaceable possession of their head-quarters, amidst the
shouts of multitudes, who seemed perfectly rejoiced at
hearing their music, but, above all, at seeing their bacon.
I must own, I could not avoid being pleased to see all
ranks of people, on this occasion, levelled into an equality,
and the poor, in some measure, enjoying the primitive
privileges of nature. If there was any distinction shown,
the lowest of the people seemed to receive it from the rich.
I could perceive a cobbler with a levee at his door, and a
haberdasher giving audience from behind his counter. But
my reflections were soon interrupted by a mob, who de-
manded whether I was for the distillery or the brewery ?
As these were terms with which I was totally unacquainted,
I chose at first to be silent; however, I know not what
might have been the consequence of my reserve, had not the
attention of the mob been called off to a skirmish between,
a brandy-drinker's cow and a gin-drinker's mastiff, which
turned out, greatly to the satisfaction of the mob, in favour
of the mastiff.
This spectacle, which afforded high entertainment, was at
last ended by the appearance of one of the candidates, who
came to harangue the mob : he made a very pathetic speech
upon the late excessive importation of foreign drams, and
the downfall of the distillery; I could see some of the
<pb>
audience shed tears. He was accompanied in his proces-
sion by Mrs. Deputy and Mrs. Mayoress. Mrs. Deputy was
not in the least in liquor ; and as for Mrs. Mayoress, one of
the spectators assured me in my ear, that—she was a very
fine woman before she had the small-pox.
Mixing with the crowd, I was now conducted to the hall
where the magistrates are chosen: but what tongue can
describe this scene of confusion ! The whole crowd seemed
equally inspired with anger, jealousy, politics, patriotism,
and punch. I remarked one figure that was carried up by
two men upon this occasion. I at first began to pity his
infirmities as natural, but soon found the fellow so drunk
that he could not stand ; another made his appearance to
give his vote, but though he could stand, he actually lost
the use of his tongue, and remained silent; a third, who,
though excessively drunk, could both stand and speak,
being asked the candidate's name for whom he voted,
could be prevailed upon to make no other answer but
" Tobacco and brandy." l In short, an election hall seems
to be a theatre, where every passion is seen without disguise;
a school where fools may readily become worse, and where
philosophers may gather wisdom.2 Adieu.
1 The Ledger gives the only utterance of the free and independent one
as :—" Tobacco and brandy for ever ! "—ED.
2 At this general election, April, 1761, the successful men in the city
were Sir E. Ladbroke, the Hon. Mr. Harley, Alderman William Beck-
ford, and Alderman Sir Richard Glynn, the unsuccessful candidate being
Alderman Sir Samuel Fludyer. The above Letter, therefore, it seems,
describes one of the suburban contests; perhaps that of Southwark,
which took place a few days before the poll in the city, and a sequel to
which appears in a paragraph of the Ledger of this date, April 3rd,
thus:—" Wednesday night Joseph Mavvby, and Alexander Hume,
Esqrs., the new members for Southwark [they beat Mr. Hammond]
gave a butt of beer to the populace in each parish in the Borough, on
which occasion there were bonfires and other demonstrations of joy."
Southwark too, the locality of " Thrale's Entire" (since Barclay and
Perkins), would be likely to have a large " brewery " interest, as indi-
cated in the note at p. 403. Indeed, a little later Mr. Thrale himself,
Johnson's and Goldsmith's friend, was returned as member for South-
wark.—ED.
<pb>
LETTER CXIII.
To the Same.
A LITERABY CONTEST OF GREAT IMPORTANCE ; IN WHICH
BOTH SIDES FIGHT BY EPIGRAM.1
THE disputes among the learned here are now carried on
in a much more compendious manner than formerly. There
was a time when folio was brought to oppose folio, and a
champion was often listed for life under the banners of a
single sorites. At present the controversy is decided in a
summary way; an epigram or an acrostic finishes the
debate, and the combatant, like the incursive Tartar, ad-
vances, and retires with a single blow.
An important literary debate at present engrosses the
attention of the town. It is carried on with sharpness, and
a proper share of this epigrammatical fury. An author,2
it seems, has taken an aversion to the faces of several
players, and has written verses to prove his dislike; the
players fall upon the author, and assure the town he must
be dull, and their faces must be good, because he wants a
dinner: a critic comes to the poet's assistance,8 asserting
that the verses were perfectly original, and so smart, that
he could never have written them without the assistance of
friends ; the friends, upon this, arraign the critic, and plainly
prove the verses to be all the author's own. So at it they
are, all four together by the ears; the friends at the critic,
1 Dated April 14, 1761, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
2 Churchill. His ' Rosciad,' in which he attacks the players, displays
great vigour both of thought and expression. His other poems, which
were generally on topics of temporary interest, though much read and
admired at the time, are now comparatively neglected.—B.
3 The critic was probably he of the Critical Review, who said of the
' Eosciad,'—" We will not pretend, however, absolutely to assert that
Mr. L wrote this poem, but we venture to affirm, that it is the pro-
duction, jointly or separately, of the new triumvirate of wit who never
let an opportunity slip of singing their own praises—caw me, caw thce,
as Sawney says; and so to it they go and scratch one another, like
Scotch pedlars." The " triumvirate" was understood to be Messrs.
Lloyd, Colman, and Thornton. See note 3, p. 409.—ED.
<pb>
the critic at the players, the players at the author, and the
author at the players again. It is impossible to determine
how this many-sided contest mil end, or which party to
adhere to. The town, without siding with any, views the
combat in suspense, like the fabled hero of antiquity, who
beheld the earth-born brothers give and receive mutual
wounds, and fall by indiscriminate destruction.
This is, in some measure, the state of the present dispute;
but the combatants here differ in one respect from the
champions of the fable. Every new wound only gives vigour
for another blow; though they appear to strike, they are in
fact mutually swelling themselves into consideration, and
thus advertising each other a way into fame. " To-day,"
' says one, " my name shall be in the Gazette, the next day
my rival's; people will naturally enquire about us; thus
we shall at least make a noise in the streets, though we
have got nothing to sell." I have read of a dispute of a
similar nature, which was managed here about twenty years
ago. Hildebrand Jacob, as I think he was called, and
Charles Johnson, were poets, both at that time possessed
of great reputation; for Johnson had written eleven plays,
acted with great success; and Jacob, though he had written
but five, had five times thanked the town for their un-
merited applause. They soon became mutually enamoured
of each other's talents; they wrote, they felt, they chal-
lenged the town for each other. Johnson assured the
public, that no poet alive had the easy simplicity of Jacob,
and Jacob exhibited Johnson as a masterpiece in the
pathetic.1 Their mutual praise was not without effect;
the town saw their plays, were in raptures, read, and without
censuring them, forgot them. So formidable an union,
however, was soon opposed by Tibbald. Tibbald2 asserted
that the tragedies of the one had faults, and the comedies
of the other substituted wit for vivacity: the combined
champions flew at him like tigers, arraigned the censurer's
judgment, and impeached his sincerity. It was a long
1 Hildebrand was an eccentric writer of plays and other things. He
was the sou of Sir John Jacob, of Bromley, and so became Sir Hilde-
brand Jacob. He died in 1790. See Nichols' Lit. Anec. Charles
Johnson figures in Pope's ' Dunciad.'—ED.
2 Theobald, the editor of Shakspere.—ED.
<pb>
time a dispute among the learned, which was in fact the
greatest man, Jacob, Johnson, or Tibbald; they had all
written for the stage with great success, their names were
seen in almost every paper, and their works in every coffee-
house. However, in the hottest of the dispute, a fourth
combatant made his appearance, and swept away the three
combatants, tragedy, comedy, and all, into undistinguished
ruin.
From this time they seemed consigned into the hands of
criticism; scarce a day passed in which they were not
arraigned as detested writers. The critics, those enemies of
Dryden and Pope, were their enemies. So Jacob and John-
son, instead of mending by criticism, called it envy; and,
because Dryden and Pope were censured, they compared
themselves to Dryden and Pope.
But to return. The weapon chiefly used in the present
controversy is epigram ; and certainly never was a keener
made use of. They have discovered surprising sharpness
on both sides. The first that came out upon this occasion
was a kind of new composition in this way, and might more
properly be called an epigrammatic thesis, than an epigram.
It consists, first, of an argument in prose; next follows a
motto from Roscommon; then comes the epigram; and,
lastly, notes serving to explain the epigram. But you shall
have it with all its decorations.
"AN EPIGRAM,
" Addressed to the Gentlemen Reflected on in The Rosciad, a Poem by
the Author.
" Worried with debts, and past all hopes of bail,
His pen he prostitutes, t'avoid a gaol."—ROSCOM.
" Let not the hungry Bavins' angry stroke
Awake resentment, or your rage provoke;
But pitying his distress, let virtue ' shine,
And giving each your bounty,8 let him dine;
For, thus retain'd, as learned counsel can,
Each case, however bad, he'll new japan :
1 Charity. [? GOLDSMITH.] See note 1 on next page.—ED.
* Settled at one shilling, the price of the poem. [? GOLDSMITH.]
<pb>
And, by a quick transition, plainly show
'Twas no defect of yours, but pocket low,
That caused his putrid kennel to o'erflow." J l
The last lines are certainly executed in a very masterly
manner. It is of that species of argumentation called the
perplexing. It effectually flings the antagonist into a mist;
there is no answering it: the laugh is raised against him
while he is endeavouring to find out the jest. At once he
shows, that the author has a kennel, and that his kennel is
putrid, and that his putrid kennel overflows. But why
does it overflow ? It overflows, because the author happens
to have low pockets !2
There was also another new attempt in this way; a prosaic
epigram which came out upon this occasion. This is so
full of matter, that a critic might split it into fifteen
epigrams, each properly fitted with its sting. You shall
see it.
TO G. C. AND 11. L.a
" 'Twas you, or I, or he, or all together,
'Twas one, both, three of them, they know not whether.
This I believe, between us great or small,
You, I, he, wrote it not—'twas Churchill's all."
There, there's a perplex! I could have wished, to make
it quite perfect, the author, as in the case before, had added
notes. Almost every word admits a scholium, and a long
1 This epigram we find was printed, together with its two notes, in
the Public Ledger, ten days prior to its quotation as above. So printed,
on April 4, it is dated as from " Gray's Inn." The first edition of the
' Rosciad' was published anonymously in March. The second edition,
with Churchill's name, appeared April 9. Goldsmith's Letter, therefore,
appeared after Churchill's avowal of the poem, though the above
Epigram had appeared before the avowal. Now, query : Is this Epi-
gram Goldsmith's ? It has been included in some late editions of his
Poems.—ED.
2 The Ledger has in addition :—" But it was impossible so good a
thing could pass without a reply; a reply, therefore, it had equally
witty, poignant, and severe."—ED.
3 By these initials are meant George Colman, the elder, and Robert
Lloyd. These gentlemen, with Mr. Bonnel Thornton, were suspected of
having assisted Churchill in writing the ' Rosciad.'—B. [Lloyd was the
author of poems, &c. Colman and Thornton were the writers of the
Connoisseur, which Goldsmith had reviewed in the Monthly Review of
1757 ; see the review in our vol. iv.—ED.]
<pb>
one too. I, YOU, rlK! Suppose a stranger should ask,
"and who are you?" Here are three obscure persons
spoken of, that may in a short time be utterly forgotten.
Their names should have consequently been mentioned in
notes at the bottom. But when the reader comes to the
words great and small, the maze is inextricable. Here the
stranger may dive for a mystery, without ever reaching the
bottom. Let him know, then, that small is a word purely
introduced to make good rhyme, and great was a very
proper word to keep small company.
Yet, by being thus a spectator of others' dangers, I must
own I begin to tremble in this literary contest for my own.
I begin to fear that my challenge to Doctor Eock l was un-
advised, and has procured me more antagonists than I had
at first expected. I have received private letters from
several of the literati here, that fill my soul with appre-
hension. I may safely aver, that I never gave any creature
in this good city offence, except only my rival Doctor Rock;
yet, by the letters I every day receive, and by some I
have seen printed, I am arraigned at one time as being a
dull fellow, at another as being pert; I am here petulant,
there I am heavy. By the head of my ancestors! they
treat me with more inhumanity than a flying fish. If I
dive and run my nose to the bottom, there a devouring
shark is ready to swallow me up ; if I skim the surface, a
pack of dolphins are at my tail to snap me ; but when I
take wing, and attempt to escape them by flight, I become
a prey to every ravenous bird that winnows the bosom of
the deep. Adieu.
2 See Letter LXVIII.—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE CXIV.
To the Same.
AGAINST THE MARBIAGE ACT. A FABLE. [THE GENIUS
OF LOVE].1
THE formalities, delays, and disappointments, that pre-
cede a treaty of marriage here, are usually as numerous as
those previous to a treaty of peace. The laws of this
country are finely calculated to promote all commerce but
the commerce between the sexes. Their encouragements for
propagating hemp, madder, and tobacco, are indeed admir-
able :2 Marriages are the only commodity that meets with
discouragement.2
Yet from the vernal softness of the air, the verdure of
the fields, the transparency of the streams, and the beauty
of the women, I know few countries more proper to in-
vite to courtship. Here Love might sport among painted
lawns and warbling groves, and revel upon gales, wafting
at once both fragrance and harmony. Yet it seems he has
forsaken the island; and, when a couple are now to be
married, mutual love, or an union of minds, is the last and
most trifling consideration. If their goods and chattels
can be brought to unite, their sympathetic souls are ever
ready to guarantee the treaty. The gentleman's mortgaged
lawn becomes enamoured of the lady's marriageable grove ;
the match is struck up, and both parties are piously in love
—according to act of parliament.
Thus, they who have fortune, are possessed at least of
something that is lovely; but I actually pity those that
have none.3 I am told there was a time when ladies, with
1 Dated April 21, 1761, in the Public Ledger, and reprinted as No.
XXIII. in the 'Essays' of 1765 and 1766. This essay seems to be a
continuation of Letter LXXII.—ED.
2-2 In lieu of this the Public Ledger has: " But the Genius of Love is
banished from hence, or has never been here." In the original editions
of the ' Citizen' the last words of the paragraph are " meets with none."
In the ' Essays' the word " discouragement" displaced " none."—ED.
3 The' Essays' version (second edit.) has "who have none."—ED.
<pb>
no other merit but youth, virtue, and beauty, had a chance
for husbands, at least among the ministers of the church,
or the officers of the army.1 The blush and innocence of
sixteen was said to have a powerful influence over these
two professions. But of late, all the little traffic of blush-
ing, ogling, dimpling, and smiling, has been forbidden by
an act in that case wisely made and provided. A lady's
whole cargo of smiles, sighs, and whispers, is declared
utterly contraband, till she arrives in the warm latitudes
of twenty-two, where commodities of this nature are too
often found to decay. She is then permitted to dimple and
smile when the dimples and smiles2 begin to forsake her ;
and, when perhaps grown ugly, is charitably intrusted
with an unlimited use of her charms. Her lovers, however,
by this time, have forsaken her; the captain has changed
for another mistress; the priest himself leaves her in soli-
tude to bewail her virginity; and she dies even without
benefit of clergy.
Thus you find the Europeans discouraging love with as
much earnestness as the rudest savage of Sofala. The
Genius is surely now no more. In every region I find3
enemies in armsto oppress him. Avarice in Europe, jealousy
in Persia, ceremony in China, poverty among the Tartars,
and lust in Circassia, are all prepared to oppose his power.
The Genius is certainly banished from earth, though once
adored under such a variety of forms. He is nowhere to
be found; and all that the ladies in each country can pro-
duce, are but a few trifling relics, as instances of his former
residence and favour.
" The Genius of Love," says the Eastern apologue,4" had
long resided in the happy plains of Abra, where every
breeze was health, and every sound produced tranquillity.
His temple at first was crowded, but every age lessened
the number of his votaries, or cooled their devotion. Per-
ceiving, therefore, his altars at length quite deserted, he
was resolved to remove to some more propitious region, and
1 " Our clergymen and officers."—ESSATS.
2 " And smiles " is omitted in the second edit, of the ' Essays.'
3 The second edit. ' Essays' has " there seem."
4 The quotation marks of the apologue are from the ' Essays ' version.
—En.
<pb>
he apprized the fair sex of every country where he could
hope for a proper reception, to assert their right to his
presence among them. In return to this proclamation,
embassies were sent from the ladies of every part of the
world to invite him, and to display the superiority of their
claims.
" And first, the beauties of China appeared. No country
could compare with them for modesty, either of look,
dress, or behaviour: their eyes were never lifted from the
ground; their robes of the most beautiful silk hid their
hands, bosom, and neck, while their faces only were left
uncovered. They indulged no airs that might express
loose desire, and they seemed to study only the graces of
inanimate beauty. Their black teeth, and plucked eye-
brows, were, however, alleged by the Genius against them,
and he set them entirely aside when he came to examine
their little feet. »
" The beauties of Circassia next made their appearance.
They advanced hand-in-hand, singing the most immodest
airs, and leading up a dance in the most luxurious atti-
tudes. Their dress was but half a covering; the neck, the
left breast, and all the limbs, were exposed to view, which,
after some time, seemed rather to satiate than inflame de-
sire. The lily and the rose contended in forming their
complexions: and a soft sleepiness of eye added irresistible
poignancy to their charms: but their beauties were ob-
truded, not offered, to their admirers; they seemed to give,
rather than receive, courtship; and the Genius of Love
dismissed them as unworthy his regard, since they exchanged
the duties of love, and made themselves not the pursued,
but the pursuing sex.
" The kingdom of Kashmire next produced its charming
deputies. This happy region seemed peculiarly sequestered
by nature for his abode. Shady mountains fenced it on
one side from the scorching sun, and sea-borne breezes on
the other, gave peculiar luxuriance to the air. Their com-
plexions were of a bright yellow, that appeared almost
transparent, while the crimson tulip seemed to blossom on
their cheeks. Their features and limbs were delicate be-
yond the statuary's power to express, and their teeth whiter
than their own ivory. He was almost persuaded to reside
<pb>
among them, when unfortunately one of the ladies talked
of appointing his seraglio.
" In this procession the naked inhabitants of Southern
America would not be left behind; their charms were found
to surpass whatever the warmest imagination could con-
ceive ; and served to show, that beauty could be perfect,
even with the seeming disadvantage of a brown complexion.
But their savage education rendered them utterly unquali-
fied to make the proper use of their power, and they were
rejected as being incapable of uniting mental with sensual
satisfaction. In this manner the deputies of other kingdoms
had their suits rejected: the black beauties of Benin, and
the tawny daughters of Borneo; the women of Wida, with
well '-scarred faces, and the hideous virgins of Cafraria; the
squab ladies of Lapland, three feet high, and the giant fair
ones of Patagonia.
" The beauties of Europe at last appeared: grace was' in
.their steps, and sensibility sat1 smiling in every eye. It
was the universal opinion while they were approaching,
that they would prevail; and the Genius seemed to lend
them his most favourable attention. They opened their
pretensions with the utmost modesty; but unfortunately,
as their orator proceeded, she happened to let fall the
words, house in town, settlement, and pin-money. These
seemingly harmless terms had instantly a surprising effect:
the Genius with ungovernable rage burst from amidst the
circle; and, waving his youthful pinions, left this earth,
and flew back to those etherial mansions from whence he
descended.
" The whole assembly was struck with amazement; they
now justly apprehended, that female power would be no
more, since Love had forsaken them. They continued
some time thus in a state of torpid despair, when it was
proposed by one of the number, that, since the real Genius2
had left them, in order to continue their power, they
should set up an idol in his stead; and that the ladies of
every country should furnish him with what each liked
best. This proposal was instantly relished and agreed to.
1 The second edition of the 'Essays' has not "well," "was," and
." sat," though the first edition had them.—ED.
2 " Genius of Love."—ESSAYS.
<pb>
An idoll was formed by uniting the capricious gifts of all
the assembly, though no way resembling the departed
Genius. The ladies of China furnished the monster with
wings ; those of Kashmire supplied him with horns; the
dames of Europe clapped a purse in his hand; and the
virgins of Congo furnished him with a tail. Since that
time, all the vows addressed to Love are in reality paid to
the idol; but,2 as in other false religions, the adoration
seems most fervent where the heart is least sincere." Adieu.
LETTEE CXV.
To the Same.
ON THE DANGER OF HAVING TOO HIGH AN OPINION
OF HUMAN NATURE.3
MANKIND have ever been prone to expatiate in the praise
of human nature. The dignity of man is a subject that
has always been the favourite theme of humanity: they
have declaimed with that ostentation which usually accom-
panies such as are sure of having a partial audience ; they
have obtained victories because there were none to oppose.
Yet, from all I have ever read or seen, men appear more
apt to err by having too high, than by having too despic-
able an opinion of their nature; and, by attempting to
exalt their original place in creation, depress their real
value in society.
The most ignorant nations have always been found to
think most highly of themselves. The Deity has ever been
1 " An idol of gold."—ESSAYS.
2 The first edition of the ' Essays' had " and, as;" the second edition,
" while as."—ED.
3 Dated May 8, 1761, in the Public Ledger. This Letter appeared
later in some of the editions of the Essays (Percy's for one), with the title
" On the Dignity of Human Nature." The fact that Percy, or his editor,
Eose, published this with the latter title, as well as with its original title,
and in its proper plane in the ' Citizen of the World,' probably indicates
that the essay had been printed elsewhere with the second title, and hence
had been inadvertently taken for a distinct work.—ED.
<pb>
thought peculiarly concerned in their glory and preserva-
tion ; to have fought their battles, and inspired their
teachers : their wizards are said to be familiar with heaven;
and every hero has a guard of angels, as well as men, to
attend him. When the Portuguese first came among-
the wretched inhabitants of the coast of Africa, these
savage nations readily allowed the strangers more skill in
navigation and war ; yet still considered them at best but
as useful servants, brought to their coast by their guardian
serpent, to supply them with luxuries they could have
lived without. Though they could grant the Portuguese
more riches, they could never allow them to have such a
king as their Tottimondelem, who wore a bracelet of
shells round his neck, and whose legs were covered with
ivory.
In this manner, examine a savage in the history of his
country and predecessors, you ever find his warriors able
to conquer armies, and his sages acquainted with more than
possible knowledge. Human nature is to him an unknown
country: he thinks it capable of great things, because he is
ignorant of its boundaries; whatever can be conceived to
be done, he allows to be possible, and whatever is possible,
he conjectures must have been done. He never measures
the actions and powers of others by what himself is able to
perform; nor makes a proper estimate of the greatness of
his fellows, by bringing it to the standard of his own in-
capacity. He is satisfied to be one of a country where
mighty things have been; and imagines the fancied power
of others reflects a lustre on himself. Thus, by degrees,
he loses the idea of his own insignificance in a confused
notion of the extraordinary powers of humanity, and is
willing to grant extraordinary gifts to every pretender, l be-
cause unacquainted with their claims.1
This is the reason why demigods and heroes have ever
been erected in times or countries of ignorance and bar-
barity : they addressed a people who had high opinions of
human nature, because they were ignorant how far it could
extend ; they addressed a people, who were willing to allow
that men should be gods, because they were yet imperfectly
'-' Instead the Ledger has, " even to the power of commanding the
ministry of heaven."—ED.
<pb>
acquainted with God, and with man. These impostors
knew, that all men are naturally fond of seeing something
very great made from the little materials of humanity;
that ignorant nations are not more proud of building a
tower to reach to heaven, or a pyramid to last for ages,
than of raising up a demigod of their own country and crea-
tion. The same pride that erects a colossus or a pyramid,
instals a god or a hero; but though the adoring savage can
raise his colossus to the clouds, he can exalt the hero not
one inch above the standard of humanity : incapable, there-
fore, of exalting the idol, he debases himself,1 and falls
prostrate before him.1
When man has thus acquired an erroneous idea2 of the
dignity of his species, he and the gods become perfectly in-
timate ; men are but angels, angels are but men—nay, but
servants, that stand in waiting to execute human commands.
The Persians, for instance, thus address their prophet
Haly ;3 " I salute thee, glorious Creator, of whom the sun
is but the shadow. Masterpiece of the Lord of human
creatures, Great Star of Justice and Religion! The sea is
not rich and liberal but by the gifts of thy munificent
hands. The angel treasurer of heaven reaps his harvest in
the fertile gardens of the purity of thy nature. The pri-
mum mobile would never dart the ball of the sun through
the trunk of heaven, were it not to serve the morning, out
of the extreme love she has for thee. The angel Gabriel,
messenger of truth, every day kisses the groundsil of thy
gate. Were there a place more exalted than the most high
throne of God, I would affirm it to be thy place, O master
of the faithful! Gabriel, with all his art and knowledge,
is but a mere scholar to thee!" Thus, my friend, men
1 Not in the Public Ledger.—ED.
2 The Ledger has " a sufficient idea."—ED.
3 Chardin's ' Travels,' p. 402.4—GOLDSMITH. [Sir John Chardin was
born in Paris, where he first published his travels (1686). He died in
1713, was buried at Chiswick, and has a monument in Westminster
Abbey.—ED.]
4 Haly, or rather Ali, Mahomet's cousin and son-in-law, is the acknow-
ledged head of the Shiites, as Khalif Omer is of the Sonnites, the two
great sects into which the Mahometans are divided. The Turks are
Sonnites, but the Persians and Arabs are of the sect of Ali.—B.
III. E E
<pb>
think proper to treat angels; but if indeed tkere be such
an order of beings, with what a degree of satirical contempt
must they listen to the songs of little mortals thus flatter-
ing each other: thus to see creatures, wiser indeed than the
monkey, and more active than the oyster, claiming to them-
selves the mastery of heaven! minims, the tenants of an
atom, thus arrogating a partnership in the creation of uni-
versal nature! Sure Heaven is kind, that launches no
thunder at those guilty heads: but it is kind, and regards
their follies with pity, nor will destroy creatures that it loved
into being.
But, whatever success this practice of making demigods
might have been attended with in barbarous nations, I do
not know that any man became a god in a country where
the inhabitants were refined. Such countries generally
have too close an inspection into human weakness, to think
it invested with celestial power. They sometimes indeed
admit the gods of strangers, or of their ancestors, which had
their existence in times of obscurity ; their weakness being
forgotten, while nothing but their power and their miracles
were remembered. The Chinese, for instance, never had
a god of their own country : the idols which the vulgar wor-
ship at this day, were brought from the barbarous nations
around them. The Boman emperors who pretended to
divinity, were generally taught by a poniard that they were
mortal; and Alexander, though he passed among barbarous
countries for a real god, could never persuade his polite
countrymen into a similitude of thinking. The Lacedemo-
nians shrewdly complied with his commands by the follow-
ing sarcastic1 edict:
EJ AXiZavSpof €OV\STCU tlvai Qsog, 6f6f ear<a.*
Adieu.
1 The Ledger has " short edict."—ED.
2 Since Alexander wishes to be a god, a god let him be.—B.
<pb>
LETTEE CXVI.
To the Same.
WHETHER LOVE BE A NATURAL OR A FICTITIOUS
THERE is something irresistibly pleasing in the conver-
sation of a fine woman; even though her tongue be silent,
the eloquence of her eyes teaches wisdom. The mind sym-
pathizes with the regularity of the object in view, and,
struck with external grace, vibrates into respondent har-
mony. In this agreeable disposition, I lately found myself
in company with my friend and his niece. Our conversa-
tion turned upon love, which she seemed equally capable
of defending and inspiring. We were each of different
opinions upon this subject: the lady insisted that it was a
natural and universal passion, and produced the happiness
of those who cultivated it with proper precaution. My
friend denied it to be the work of nature, but allowed it to
have a real existence, and affirmed, that it was of infinite
service in refining society; while I, to keep up the dispute,
affirmed it to be merely a name, first used by the cunning
part of the fair sex, and admitted by the silly part of ours,
therefore no way more natural than taking snuff, or chew-
ing opium.
" How is it possible," cried I, " that such a passion can
be natural, when our opinions even of beauty, which inspires
it, are entirely the result of fashion and caprice ? The an-
cients, who pretended to be connoisseurs in the art, have
praised narrow foreheads, red hair, and eyebrows that joined
each other above the nose. Such were the charms that
once captivated Catullus, Ovid, and Anacreon. Ladies
would at present be out of humour, if their lovers praised
them for such graces; and should an antique beauty now
revive, her face would certainly be put under the discipline
of the tweezer, forehead-cloth, and lead comb, before it
could be seen in public company.
1 Dated May 13, 1761, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
" But the difference between the ancients and moderns
is not so great as between the different countries of the pre-
sent world. A lover of Gongora, for instance, sighs for
thick lips: a Chinese lover is poetical in praise of thin. In
Circassia, a straight nose is thought most consistent with
beauty: cross but a mountain which separates it from the
Tartars, and their flat noses, tawny skins, and eyes three
inches asunder, are all the fashion. In Persia, and some
other countries, a man, when he marries, chooses to have
his bride a maid: in the Philippine Islands, if a bridegroom
happens to perceive, on the first night, that he is put off'
with a virgin, the marriage is2 declared void to all intents
and purposes, and the bride sent back with disgrace. In
some parts of the East, a woman of beauty, properly fed up
for sale, often amounts to one hundred crowns: in the
kingdom of Loango, ladies of the very best fashion are sold
for a pig; queens, however, sell better, and sometimes
amount to a cow. In short, turn even to England, do not
I there see the beautiful part of the sex neglected; and
none now marrying or making love, but old men and old.
women that have saved money ? Do not I see beauty from
fifteen to twenty-one rendered null and void to all intents
and purposes, and those six precious years of womanhood,
put under a statute of virginity ? What! shall I call that
rancid passion love, which passes between an old bachelor
of fifty-six, and a widow lady of forty-nine ? Never, never!
what advantage is society to reap from an intercourse,
where the big belly is oftenest on the man's side ? Would
any persuade me that such a passion was natural, unless
the human race were more fit for love as they approached
the decline, and, like silk worms, became breeders just
before they expired ? "
"Whether love be natural or no," replied my friend,
gravely, " it contributes to the happiness of every society
into which it is introduced. All our pleasures are short,
and can only charm at intervals; love is a method of pro-
tracting our greatest pleasure; and surely that gamester,
who plays the greatest stake to the best advantage, will, at
1 The Ledger has " fobbed off."—ED.
" The Ledger has in addition " (by Act of Parliament, I suppose)."—
ED.
<pb>
the end of life, rise victorious. This was the opinion of
Vanini,1 who affirmed, that every hour was lost which was not
spent in love. His accusers were unable to comprehend his
meaning, and the poor advocate for love was burned in
flames—alas ! no way metaphorical. But whatever advan-
tages the individual may reap from this passion, society
will certainly be refined and improved by its introduction:
all laws calculated to discourage it, tend to imbrute the
species and weaken the state. Though it cannot plant
morals in the human breast, it cultivates them when there:
pity, generosity, and honour, receive a brighter polish from
its assistance; and a single amour is sufficient entirely to
brush off the clown.
" But it is an exotic of the most delicate constitution; it
requires the greatest art to introduce it into a state, and
the smallest discouragement is sufficient to repress it again.
Let us only consider with what ease it was formerly extin-
guished in Rome, and with what difficulty it was lately
revived in Europe: it seemed to sleep for ages, and at last
fought its way among us, through tilts, tournaments,
dragons, and all the dreams of chivalry. The rest of the
world, China only excepted, are, and have ever been, utter
strangers to its delights and advantages. In other coun-
tries, as men find themselves stronger than women, they
lay claim to a rigorous superiority: this is natural, and
love, which gives up this natural advantage, must certainly
be the effect of art—an art calculated to lengthen out our
happier moments, and add new graces to society."
" I entirely acquiesce in your sentiments," says the lady,
" with regard to the advantages of this passion, but cannot
avoid giving it a nobler origin than you have been pleased (
to assign. I must think, that those countries where it is
rejected, are obliged to have recourse to art to stifle so
natural a production; and those nations where it is culti-
vated, only make nearer advances to nature. The same,
efforts that are used in some places to suppress pity, and
other natural passions, may have been employed to extin-
guish love. No nation, however unpolished, is remarkable
for innocence, that is not famous for passion; it has
1 Vanini was burnt at Toulouse for alleged atheism in 1619: See our
edition of the ' Bee,' vol. ii., p. 412.—ED.
<pb>
flourished in the coldest, as well as in the warmest regions.
Even in the sultry wilds of Southern America, the lover is
not satisfied with possessing his mistress's person without
having her mind:
" In all my Emm's beauties blest,
Amidst profusion still I pine;
For though she gives me up lier breast,
Its panting tenant is not mine."1
" But the effects of love are too violent to be the result
of an artificial passion. Nor is it in the power of fashion
to force the constitution into those changes which we every
day observe. Several have died of it. Few lovers are un-
acquainted with the fate of the two Italian lovers, Da
Corsin and Julia Bellamano, who, after a long separation,
expired with pleasure in each other's arms. Such instances
are too strong confirmations of the reality of the passion,
and serve to show that suppressing it is but opposing the
natural dictates of the heart."2 Adieu.
LETTEK CXVn.
To the Same.
A CITT NIGHT-PIECE.3
THE clock just struck two, the expiring taper rises and
sinks in the socket, the watchman forgets the hour in
slumber, the laborious and the happy are at rest, and no-
thing wakes but meditation, guilt, revelry, and despair. The
drunkard once more fills the destroying bowl, the robber
1 Translation of a South American Ode.—GOLDSMITH. [This note is
not in the Public Ledger. Mr. Mitford read " In all my Emma's," &c.
—ED.]
2 The Ledger has in addition, " Upon the whole," cries my friend, in-
terrupting her, " this topic is too metaphysical for conversation, and
rather more adapted to the closet than the tea-table. The best way of
treating a subject like this is to endeavour to get to the bottom of it, in
private."—ED.
3 First published in No. IV. of the ' Bee' (Oct. 27,1759), which see at
vol. ii., p. 376. The ' Bee' version has an additional paragraph.—ED.
<pb>
walks his midnight round, and the suicide lifts his guilty
arm against his own sacred person.
Let me no longer waste the night over the page of anti-
quity, or the sallies of contemporary genius, but pursue the
solitary walk, where vanity, ever changing, but a few
hours past walked before me: where she kept up' the
pageant, and now, like a froward child, seems hushed with
her own importunities.
What a gloom hangs all around! The dying lamp feebly
emits a yellow gleam; no sound is heard but of the
chiming clock, or the distant watch-dog. All the bustle of
human pride is forgotten: an hour like this may well dis-
play the emptiness of human vanity.
There will come a time, when this temporary solitude
may be made continual, and the city itself, like its inhabi-
tants, fade away, and leave a desert in its room.
What cities, as great as this, have once triumphed in
existence, had their victories as great, joy as just and as
unbounded; and, with short-sighted presumption, pro-
mised themselves immortality ! Posterity can hardly trace
the situation of some: The sorrowful traveller wanders
over the awful ruins of others; and, as he beholds, he
learns wisdom, and feels the transience of every sublunary
possession.
" Here," he cries, " stood their citadel, now grown over
with weeds ; there their senate-house, but now the haunt
of every noxious reptile; temples and theatres stood here,
now only an undistinguished heap of ruin. They are fallen,
for luxury and avarice first made them feeble. The re-
wards of the state were conferred on amusing, and not on
useful members of society. Their riches and opulence in-
vited the invaders, who, though at first repulsed, returned
again, conquered by perseverance, and at last swept the
defendants into undistinguished destruction."
How few appear in those streets which but some few
hours ago were crowded! and those who appear, now
no longer wear their daily mask, nor attempt to hide their
lewdness or their misery.
But who are those who make the streets their couch, and
find a short repose from wretchedness at the doors of the
opulent? These are strangers, wanderers, and orphans,
<pb>
whose circumstances are too humble to expect redress, and
whose distresses are too great even for pity. Their
wretchedness excites rather horror than pity. Some are
without the covering even of rags, and others emaciated
with disease; the world has disclaimed them; society turns
its back upon their distress, and has given them up to
nakedness and hunger. These poor shivering females
have once seen happier days, and been flattered into
beauty. They have been prostituted to the gay luxurious
villain, and are now turned out to meet the severity of
winter. Perhaps, now lying at the doors of their betrayers,
they sue to wretches whose hearts are insensible, or de-
bauchees who may curse, but will not relieve them.1
Why, why was I born a man, and yet see the sufferings
of wretches I cannot relieve ! Poor houseless creatures !
the world will give you reproaches, but will not give you
relief. The slightest misfortunes of the great, the most
imaginary uneasiness of the rich, are aggravated with all
the power of eloquence, and held up to engage our atten-
tion and sympathetic sorrow. The poor weep unheeded,
persecuted by every subordinate species of tyranny ; and
every law which gives others security, becomes an enemy to
them.2
Why was this heart of mine formed with so much sen-
sibility ? or why was not my fortune adapted to its im-
pulse? Tenderness, without a capacity of relieving, only
makes the man who feels it more wretched than the object
which sues for assistance.3 Adieu.
1 Compare ' The Deserted Village,' 11. 325-336.
" Ah, turn thine eyes
Where the poor houseless shivering female lies:" &c.
—ED.
* Compare the opening paragraphs of Letter CXIX (' On the Dis-
tresses of the Poor,' &c).—ED.
3 For the additional paragraph which followed here when the essay
was originally published in the ' Bee,' see our vol. ii., p. 378. A few
verbal differences in the two versions may also be noted.—ED.
<pb>
LETTEE CXVHI.
Fum Hoam, lo Lien Chi Altangi, the Discontented Wanderer,
by the way of Moscow.
ON THE MEANNESS OF THE DUTCH AT THE COURT OF
JAPAN.1
I HAVE been just sent upon an embassy to Japan; my
commission is to be despatched in four days, and you can
hardly conceive the pleasure I shall find upon revisiting my
native country. I shall leave with joy this proud, barba-
rous, inhospitable region, where every object conspires to
diminish my satisfaction, and increase my patriotism.
But though I find the inhabitants savage, yet the Dutch
merchants who are permitted to trade hither, seem still
more detestable. They have raised my dislike to Europe
in general; by them I learn how low avarice can degrade
human nature; how many indignities a European will
suffer for gain.
I was present at an audience given by the emperor to the
Dutch envoy, who had sent several presents to all the
courtiers some days previous to his admission; but he was
obliged to attend those designed for the emperor himself.
From the accounts I had heard of this ceremony, my
curiosity prompted me to be a spectator of the whole.
First went the presents, set out on beautiful enamelled
tables, adorned with flowers, borne on men's shoulders, and
followed by Japanese music and dancers. From so great
respect paid to the gifts themselves, I had fancied the
donors must have received almost divine honours. But,
about a quarter of an hour after the presents had been
carried in triumph, the envoy and his train were brought
forward. They were covered from head to foot with long
black veils, which prevented their seeing, each led by a
conductor, chosen from the meanest of the people. In this
dishonourable manner, having traversed the city of Jedo,
they at length arrived at the palace gate; and, after wait-
ing half an hour, were admitted into the guard-room.
1 Dated Aug. 5, 1760, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
Here their eyes were uncovered, and in about an hour,
the gentleman usher introduced them into the hall of
audience. The emperor was at length shown, sitting in a
kind of alcove at the upper end of the room, and the Dutch
envoy was conducted towards the throne.
As soon as he had approached within a certain distance,
the gentleman usher cried out with a loud voice, Holanda,
Capitan; upon these words, the envoy fell flat upon the
ground, and crept upon his hands and feet towards the
throne. Still approaching, he reared himself upon his
knees, and then bowed his forehead to the ground. These
ceremonies being over, he was directed to withdraw, still
grovelling on his belly, and going backward like a lobster.1
Men must be excessively fond of riches, when they are
earned with such circumstances of abject submission. Do
the Europeans worship Heaven itself with marks of more
profound respect ? Do they confer those honours on the
Supreme of Beings, which they pay to a barbarous king,
who gives them a permission to purchase trinkets and porce-
lain ? What a glorious exchange, to forfeit their national
honour, and even their title to humanity, for a screen or a
snuff-box!
If these ceremonies essayed in the first audience appeared
mortifying, those which were practised in the second are
infinitely more so. In the second audience, the emperor
and the ladies of the court were placed behind lattices, in
such a manner as to see, without being seen. Here all the
Europeans were directed to pass in review, and grovel and
act the serpent as before: with this spectacle the whole
court seemed highly delighted. The strangers were asked
a thousand ridiculous questions, as their names, and their
1 Kaempfer, the historian of Japan (b. 1651, d. 1716), is closely fol-
lowed in this account. In lieu of the last words of this particular para-
graph, however, the Japanese historian (according to Scheuchzer's trans-
lation) has " like a crab." Kaempfer's book on Japan was translated
into English by Dr. Scheuchzer at the expense of Sir Hans Sloane, in
1727. The historian and traveller confesses to have himself performed
at one of these audiences of the emperor : as thus—" I joined to my
dance a love-song in High German. In this manner, and with innumer-
able such other apish tricks did we suffer ourselves to contribute to the
emperor's and the court's diversion:" vide ' Hist. Japan,'Lond. 1727-28,
vol. ii., pp. 532-535.—ED.
<pb>
ages f they were ordered to write, to stand upright, to sit,
to stoop, to compliment each other, to be drunk, to speak
the Japanese language, to talk Dutch, to sing, to eat; in
short, they were ordered to do all that could satisfy the
curiosity of women.
Imagine, my dear Altangi, a set of grave men thus
transformed into buffoons, and acting a part every whit as
honourable as that of those instructed animals which are
shown in the streets of Pekin to the mob on a holyday.
Yet the ceremony did not end here, for every great lord of
the court was to be visited in the same manner; and their
ladies, who took the whim from their husbands, were all
equally fond of seeing the strangers perform, even the
children seeming highly diverted with the dancing Dutch-
men.
"Alas," cried I to myself, upon returning from such a
spectacle, " is this the nation which assumes such dignity
at the court of Pekin ? Is this that people that appear so
proud at home, and in every country where they have the
least authority ? How does a love of gain transform the
gravest of mankind into the most contemptible and ridi-
culous ! I had rather continue poor all my life, than,
become rich at such a rate. Perish those riches which are
acquired at the expense of my honour or my humanity!
Let me quit," said I, " a country where there are none but
such as treat all others like slaves, and more detestable
still, in suffering such treatment. I have seen enough of
this nation to desire to see more of others. Let me leave
a people suspicious to excess, whose morals are corrupted,
and equally debased by superstition and vice; where the
sciences are left uncultivated, where the great are slaves to
the prince, and tyrants to the people; where the women,
are chaste only when debarred of the power of transgres-
sion ; where the true disciples of Confucius are not less
persecuted than those of Christianity; in a word, a country
where men are forbidden to think, and consequently labour
tinder the most miserable slavery,—that of mental servi-
tude." Adieu.
<pb>
LETTER CXIX.
From Lien Chi Altangi, to Fum Hoam, First President, &c.1
ON THE DISTRESSES OF THE POOR ; EXEMPLIFIED IN THE
LIFE OF A PRIVATE SENTINEL.2
THE misfortunes of the great, my friend, are held up to
engage our attention, are enlarged upon in tones of decla-
mation, and the world is called upon to gaze at the noble
sufferers : they have at once the comfort of admiration and
Yet, where is the magnanimity of bearing misfortunes
when the whole world is looking on? Men, in such cir-
cumstances, can act bravely even from motives of vanity.3
He only who in the vale of obscurity, can brave adversity
— who, without friends to encourage, acquaintances to pity,
or even without hope to alleviate his distresses, can behave
with tranquillity and indifference, is truly great : whether
peasant or courtier, he deserves admiration, and should be
held up for our imitation and respect.
[While the slightest inconveniences of the great are
magnified into calamities ; while tragedy mouths out their
sufferings in all the strains of eloquence *] , the miseries of
the poor are, however, entirely disregarded ; though ^ome
undergo more real hardships in one day, than the great in
1 First published in the British Magazine for June 1760, p. 369.
After using it for the 'Citizen' collection, the author again repro-
duced it, with alterations, as No. XXIV., in the ' Essays,' 1765 and
1766.— ED.
2 In the original editions this letter is headed " From the Same."
But it clearly is not from Fum Hoam, as was the last letter. We
therefore correct the originals in this particular. The ' Essays ' edition
and the Magazine edition open with — " No observation is more common,
and at the same time more true, than ' That one half the world are igno-
rant how the other half lives.' " — ED.
3 Compare Letter LXVIL, pp., 252, 253.— ED.
4 Compare the opening paragraphs of the ' Night Piece,' Letter CX VII.
The passages here in brackets appear only in the Magazine and ' Essays '
editions. — ED.
<pb>
their whole lives. It is indeed inconceivable what difficul-
ties the meanest English sailor or soldier endures without
murmuring or regret [; without passionately declaiming
against Providence, or calling their fellows to be gazers on
their intrepidity]. Every day to him is a day of misery,
and yet he bears his hard fate without repining.
With what indignation do I hear the heroes of tragedy1
complain of misfortunes and hardships, whose greatest
calamity is founded in arrogance and pride! Their severest
distresses are pleasures, compared to what many of the
adventuring poor every day sustain without murmuring.
These may eat, drink, and sleep; have slaves to attend
them, and are sure of subsistence for life; while many of
their fellow-creatures are obliged to wander, without a
friend to comfort or to assist them, find enmity in every law,
and are too poor to obtain even justice.2
I have been led into these reflections from accidentally
meeting, some days ago, a poor fellow3 begging at one of
the outlets of this town, with a wooden leg. I was curious
to learn what had reduced him to his present situation;
and, after giving him what I thought proper, desired to
know the history of his life and misfortunes, and the
manner in which he was reduced to his present distress.
The disabled soldier, for such he was, with an intrepidity
truly British, leaning on his crutch, put him self into an
attitude to comply with my request, and gave me his his-
tory as follows:—
" As for misfortunes, Sir, I cannot pretend to have gone
through more than others. Except the loss of my limb,
and my being obliged to beg, I don't know any reason,
thank Heaven, that I have to complain: there are some4
1 The ' Essays' and Magazine editions read—" With what indignation
do I hear an Ovid, a Cicero, or a Babutin, complain of their misfortunes
and hardships, whose greatest calamity was that of being unable to visit
a certain spot of earth to which they had foolishly attached an idea of
happiness."—ED.
2 Instead of " find enmity," &c., the ' Essays' and Magazine have—
" and even without shelter from the severity of the season."—ED.
3 The ' Essays' and Magazine have—" whom I knew when a boy,
dressed in a sailor's jacket."—ED.
1 Variation in Magazine and ' Essays' editions—" there is Bill Tibbs,"
&c.—ED.
<pb>
who have lost both legs and an eye ; but, thank Heaven, it
is not quite so bad with me.
" My father was a labourer in the country,1 and died
when I was five years old; so I was put upon the parish.
As he had been a wandering sort of a man, the parishioners
were not able to tell to what parish I belonged, or where I
was born; so they sent me to another parish, and that
parish sent me to a third: till at last it was thought I be-
longed to no parish at all. At length, however, they fixed
me. I had some disposition to be a scholar, and had actually
learned my letters; but the master of the workhouse put
me to business as soon as I was able to handle a mallet.
" Here I lived an easy kind of a life for five years. I
only wrought ten hours in the day, and had my meat and
drink provided for my labour. It is true, I was not suffered
to stir far from the house, for fear I should run away : but
what of that ? I had the liberty of the whole house, and
the yard before the door, and that was enough for me.
" I was next bound out to a farmer, where I was up both
early and late; but I ate and drank well, and liked my
business well enough, till he died. Being then obliged to
provide for myself, I was resolved to go and seek my for-
tune. Thus I lived, and went from town to town, working
when I could get employment, and starving when I could
get none, and might have lived so still. But happening
one day to go through a field belonging to a magistrate, I
spied a hare crossing the path just before me. I believe the
devil put it in my head to fling my stick at it: well, what
will you have on 't ? I killed the hare, and was bringing it
a.way in triumph, when the Justice himself met me: he
called me a villain, and, collaring me, desired I would give
an account of myself. I began immediately to give a full
account of all that I knew of my breed, seed, and genera-
tion ; but though I gave a very long account, the Justice
said I could give no account of myself; so I was indicted,
and found guilty of being poor, and sent to Newgate, in
order to be transported to the plantations.
" People may say this and that of being in jail; but for
my part, I found Newgate as agreeable a place as ever I
1 Variation in Magazine and' Essays' editions—" I was born in Shrop
shire," &c.—ED.
<pb>
was in in all my life. I had my bellyful to eat and drink,
and did no work ; but, alas! this kind of life was too good
to last for ever! I was taken out of prison, after five
months, put on board of a ship, and sent off with two
hundred more. Our passage was but indifferent, for we
were all confined in the hold, and died very fast, for want
of sweet air and provisions; but, for my part, I did not
want meat, because I had a fever all the way: Providence
was kind; when provisions grew short, it took away my
desire of eating. When we came ashore, we were sold to
the planters. I was bound for seven years, and as I was
no scholar—for I had forgot my letters—I was obliged to
work among the negroes; and served out my time, as in
duty bound to do.
" When my time was expired, I worked my passage home,
and glad I was to see Old England again, because I loved
my country. ' O, liberty! liberty! liberty ! that is the pro-
perty of every Englishman, and I will die in its defence!l I
was afraid, however, that I should be indicted for a vaga-
bond once more, so I did not much care to go into the
country, but kept about town, and did little jobs when I
could get them. I was very happy in this manner for some
time ; till one evening, coming home from work, two men
knocked me down, and then desired me to stand still.
They belonged to a press-gang: I was carried before the
Justice, and as I could give no account of myself, (that
was the thing that always hobbled me,) I had my choice
left, whether to go on board a man-of-war, or list for a
soldier. I chose to be a soldier; and in this post of a
gentleman I served two campaigns, was at the battles in
Flanders,2 and received but one wound through the breast,
which is troublesome to this day.
" When the peace came on, I was discharged; and as I
could not work, because my wound was sometimes painful,
I listed for a laud man in the East India Company's service.
I here fought the French in six pitched battles ; and verily
believe, that if I could read or write, our captain would
have given me promotion, and made me a corporal. But
'-' Not in the Magazine, nor in the ' Essays."—ED.
2 The Magazine and ' Essays' editions have—" battles of Val and
Fontenoy."—ED.
<pb>
that was not my good fortune, I soon fell sick, and when I
became good for nothing, got leave to return home again
with forty pounds in my pocket, which I saved in the ser-
vice. This was at the beginning of the present war, so I
hoped to be set on shore, and to have the pleasure of
spending my money; but the government wanted men,
and I was pressed again, before ever I could set foot on shore.
" The boatswain found me, as he said, an obstinate
fellow : he swore that I understood my business perfectly
well, but that I pretended sickness1 merely to be idle.
God knows, I knew nothing of sea business: he beat me
without considering what he was about. But still my
forty pounds was some comfort to me under every beating:
the money was my comfort, and the money I might have
had to this day, but that our ship was taken by the French,
and so I lost it all!
"Ourcrew was carried into a French prison, and many
of them died, because they were not used to live in a jail;
but for my part, it was nothing to me, for I was seasoned.
One night, however, as I was sleeping on a bed of boards,
with a warm blanket about me, (for I always loved to lie
well,) I was awaked by the boatswain, who had a dark
lantern in his hand. ' Jack,' says he to me, ' will you
knock out the French sentries' brains ?'—' I don't care,'
says I, striving to keep myself awake, ' if I lend a hand.'
—' Then follow me,' says he, ' and I hope we shall do
business.' So up I got, and tied my blanket, which was
all the clothes I had, about my middle, and went with him
to fight the Frenchmen.2 We had no arms; but one Eng-
lishman is able to beat five French at any time; so we
went down to the door, where both the sentries were
posted, and, rushing upon them, seized their arms in a
moment, and knocked them down. From thence, nine of
us ran together to the quay, and seizing the first boat we
met, got out of the harbour, and put to sea. We had not
been here three days before we were taken up by an Eng-
1 The Magazine and' Essays ' editions have—" shammed Abraham."—
ED.
. This is also the Magazine version. To the'Essays'edition Goldsmith
added the (for the soldier) characteristic—" I hate the French, because
they are all slaves, and wear wooden shoes."—ED.
<pb>
lishl privateer, who was glad of so many good hands ; and
we consented to run our chance. However, we had not so
much luck as we expected. In three days we fell in with
a French man-of-war, of forty guns, while we had but
twenty-three ; so to it we went. The fight lasted for three
hours, and I verily believe we should have taken the
Frenchman, but unfortunately, we lost almost all our men,
just as we were going to get the victory. I was once more
in the power of the French, and I believe it would have
gone hard with me, had I been brought back to my old
jail in Brest; but, by good fortune, we were retaken, and
carried to England once more.
" I had almost forgot to tell you, that in this last engage-
ment I was wounded in two places,—I lost four fingers of
the left hand, and my leg was shot off. Had I had the
good fortune to have lost my leg and use of my hand on
board a king's ship, and not a privateer, I should have
been entitled to clothing and maintenance during the rest
of my life ; but that was not my chance: one man is born
with a silver spoon in his mouth, and another with a
wooden ladle. However, blessed be God, I enjoy good
health,2 and have no enemy in this world, that I know of,
but the French and the Justice of Peace."
' Thus saying, he limped off, leaving my friend and me in
admiration of his intrepidity and content; nor could we
avoid acknowledging, that an habitual acquaintance with
misery,3 is the truest school of fortitude and philosophy.
Adieu.
1 The Magazine and ' Essays ' have—" Dorset privateer."—ED.
2 The British Magazine version has.—" I enjoy good health, and will
how go and drink to that of your honour." The ' Essay' edition has—" I
enjoy good health, and will for ever love Liberty and Old England, Liberty,
property and Old England for ever, huzza!"—ED.
3 Instead of—" is the truest," &c., the ' Essays' and Magazine read—
" acquaintance with misery serves better than philosophy to teach us to
despise it;" For a possible companion to this essay see our Appendix.
And for further information respecting the essay and its first publica-
tion in the British Magazine, see the essay on ' Ennui' in our vol. iv.,
pp. 405-406 of vol. i., p. 456, vol. ii., &c.—ED.
III. F F
<pb>
LETTER CXX.
. To the Same.
ON THE ABSURDITY OF SOME LATE ENGLISH TITLES.1
THE titles of European princes are rather more nume-
rous than ours of Asia, but by no means so sublime. The
king of Visapour, or Pegu, not satisfied with claiming the
globe, and all its appurtenances to him and his heirs,
asserts a property even in the firmament, and extends his
orders to the milky way. The monarchs of Europe, with
more modesty, confine their titles to earth, but make up by
number what is wanting in their sublimity. Such is their
passion for a long list of these splendid trifles, that I have
known a German prince with more titles than subjects, and
a Spanish nobleman with more names than shirts.
Contrary to this, " the English monarchs," says a writer
of the last century, " disdain to accept of such titles, which
tend only to increase their pride, without improving their
glory; they are above depending on the feeble helps of
heraldry for respect, perfectly satisfied with the conscious-
ness of acknowledged power." At present, however, these
maxims are laid aside ; the English monarchs have of late
assumed new titles, and have impressed their coins with
the names and arms of obscure dukedoms, petty states,
and subordinate employments.2 Their design in this, I
make no doubt, was laudably to add new lustre to the
British throne; but, in reality, paltry claims only serve to
diminish that respect they are designed to secure.
There is, in the honours assumed by kings, as in the
decorations of architecture, a majestic simplicity, which
best conduces to inspire our reverence and respect: nume-
1 Dated July 8, 1761, in the Public Ledger.—ED.
2 In allusion to the new coinage of the new King, George III., which
had for legend " M. B. F. et H. Rex. F. D. B. et L. D. S. B. I. A. T. et
E." signifying " King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburg, Arch-Treasurer and
Elector of the Holy Roman Empire." The more familiar " Britanniarum
Rex Fidei Defensor," came with the union with Ireland, in 1801.—ED.
<pb>
rcras and trifling ornaments in either, are strong indications
of meanness in the designer, or of concealed deformity.
Should, for instance, the emperor of China, among other
titles, assume that of Deputy Mandarine of Maccau;1 or
the monarch of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, desire
to be acknowledged as Duke of Brentford, Lunenburg, or
Lincoln, the observer revolts at this mixture of important
and paltry claims, and forgets the Emperor in his fami-
liarity with the Duke or the Deputy.
I remember a similar instance of this inverted ambition,
in the illustrious king of Manacabo, upon his first treaty
with the Portuguese. Among the presents that were
made him by the ambassador of that nation, was a sword,
with a brass hilt, which he seemed to set a peculiar value
upon. This he thought too great an acquisition to his
glory to be forgotten among the number of his titles. He
therefore gave orders, that his subjects should style him
for the future, Talipot, the immortal Potentate of Manacabo,
Messenger of Morning, Enlightener of the Sun, Possessor of
the whole Earth, and mighty Monarch of the Brass-handled
Sword.
This method of mixing majestic and paltry titles, of
quartering the arms of a great empire, and an obscure
province, upon the same medal here, had its rise in the
virtuous partiality of their late monarchs. Willing to
testify an affection to their native country, they gave its
name and ensigns a place upon their coins, and thus, in
some measure, ennobled its obscurity. It was, indeed, but
just, that a people which had given England up their king,
should receive some honorary equivalent in return; but at
present these motives are no more: England has now a
monarch wholly British;2 and it has some reason to hope
for British titles upon British coins.
However, were the money of England designed to circu-
late in Germany, there would be no flagrant impropriety
in impressing it with German names and arms; but,
though this, might have been so upon former occasions, I
am told there is no danger of it for the future. As Eng-
1 Macao, no doubt, is meant.—ED.
8 George III., in coming to the throne, claimed that he was wholly
English.—ED.
<pb>
land, therefore, designs to keep back its gold, I candidly
think, Lunenburg, Oldenburg, and the rest of them, may
very well keep back their titles.
It is a mistaken prejudice in princes to think that a
number of loud sounding names can give new claims to
respect. The truly great have ever disdained them. When
Timur the Lame' had conquered Asia, an orator by profes-
sion came to compliment him upon the occasion. He
began his harangue, by styling him the most omnipotent,
and the most glorious object of the creation. The emperor
seemed displeased with his paltry adulation, yet still he
went on, complimenting him as the most mighty, the most
valiant, and the most perfect of beings. "Hold there, my
friend," cries the lame emperor; " hold there till I have
got another leg." In fact, the feeble, or the despotic alone,
find pleasure in multiplying these pageants of vanity, but
strength and freedom have nobler aims, and often find the
finest adulation in majestic simplicity.
The young monarch of this country has already testified
a proper contempt for several unmeaning appendages on
royalty; cooks and scullions have been obliged to quit
their fires ; gentlemen's gentlemen, and the whole tribe of
necessary people who did nothing, have been dismissed from
farther services. A youth who can thus bring back simpli-
city and frugality to a court, will soon probably have a
true respect for his own glory; and while he has dismissed
all useless employments, may disdain to accept of empty
or degrading titles. Adieu.
1 Better known under the name of Tamerlane. According to the
historian Arabshah, Timur was maimed in one hand and lame of the
right side.—B.
<pb>
LETTER CXXI.
To the Same.
THE IRRESOLUTION OF THE ENGLISH ACCOUNTED FOR.
WHENEVER I attempt to characterize the English in
general, some unforeseen difficulties constantly occur to
disconcert my design; I hesitate between censure and
praise. When I consider them as a reasoning, philosophi-
cal people, they have my applause; but when I reverse the
medal, and observe their inconstancy and irresolution, I
can scarcely persuade myself that I am observing the same
people.
Yet, upon examination, this very inconstancy, so remark-
able here, flows from no other source than their love of
reasoning. The man who examines a complicated subject
on every side, and calls in reason to his assistance, will
frequently change; will find -himself distracted by oppos-
ing probabilities and contending proofs; every alteration
of place will diversify the prospect, will give some latent
argument new force, and contribute to maintain an anarchy
in the mind.
On the contrary, they who never examine with their own
reason, act with more simplicity. Ignorance is positive,
instinct perseveres, and the human being moves in safety
within the narrow circle of brutal uniformity. What is
true with regard to individuals, is not less so when applied
to states. A reasoning government like this is in con-
tinual fluctuation, while those kingdoms where men are
taught not to controvert but obey, continue always the
same. In Asia, for instance, where the monarch's autho-
rity is supported by force, and acknowledged through fear,
a change of government is entirely unknown. All the in-
habitants seem to wear the same mental complexion, and
remain contented with hereditary oppression. The sove-
reign's pleasure is the ultimate rule of duty ; every branch
of the administration is a perfect epitome of the whole;
and if one tyrant is deposed, another starts up in his room
<pb>
to govern as his predecessor. The English, on the con-
trary, instead of being led by power, endeavour to guide
themselves by reason; instead of appealing to the pleasure
of the prince, appeal to the original rights of mankind.
What one rank of men assert, is denied by others, as the
reasons on opposite sides happen to come home with
greater or less conviction. The people of Asia are directed
by precedent, which never alters; the English, by reason,
which is ever changing its appearance.
The disadvantages of an Asiatic government, acting in
this manner by precedent, are evident: original errors are
thus continued, without hopes of redress; and all marks of
genius are levelled down to one standard, since no supe-
riority of thinking can be allowed its exertion in mending
obvious defects. But to recompense those defects, their
governments undergo no new alterations; they have no
new evils to fear, nor no fermentations in the constitution
that continue; the struggle for power is soon over, and all
becomes tranquil as before ; they are habituated to subor-
dination, and men are taught to form no other desires than
those which they are allowed to satisfy.
The disadvantages of a government acting from the im-
mediate influence of reason, like that of England, are not
less than those of the farmer. It is extremely difficult to
induce a number of free beings to co-operate for their
mutual benefit; every possible advantage will necessarily
be sought, and every attempt to procure it must be attended
, with a new fermentation; various reasons will lead different
ways, and equity and advantage will often be outbalanced
by a combination of clamour and prejudice. But though
such a people may be thus in the wrong, they have been
influenced by a happy delusion; their errors are seldom
seen till they are felt; each man is himself the tyrant he
has obeyed, and such a master he can easily forgive. The
disadvantages he feels may, in reality, be equal to what is
felt in the most despotic government; but man will bear
every calamity with patience when he knows himself to be
the author of his own misfortunes. Adieu.
<pb>
LETTER CXXII.
To the Same.
THE MANNER OF TRAVELLERS IN THEIR USUAL RELATIONS
RIDICULED.
MY long residence here begins to fatigue me. As every
object ceases to be new, it no longer continues to be
pleasing : some minds are so fond of variety, that pleasure
itself, if permanent, would be insupportable, and we are
thus obliged to solicit new happiness even by courting dis-
tress. I only, therefore, wait the arrival of my son to vary
this trifling scene, and borrow new pleasure from danger
and fatigue. A life, I own, thus spent in wandering from
place to place, is at best but empty dissipation. But to
pursue trifles is the lot of humanity; and whether we
bustle in a pantomime, or strut at a coronation ; whether
we shout at a bonfire, or harangue in a senate-house; what-
ever object we follow, it will at last surely conduct us to
futility and disappointment. The wise bustle and laugh
as they walk in the pageant, but fools bustle and are im-
portant ; and this probably is all the difference between
them.
This may be an apology for the levity of my former
correspondence; I talked of trifles, and I knew that they
were trifles : to make the things of this life ridiculous, it is
only sufficient to call them by their names.
In other respects, I have omitted several striking circum-
stances in the description of this country, as supposing
them either already known to you, or as not being
thoroughly known to myself; but there is one omission for
which I expect no forgiveness, namely, my being totally
silent upon their buildings, roads, rivers, and mountains.
This is a branch of science on which all other travellers are
so very prolix, that my deficiency will appear the more
glaring. With what pleasure, for instance, do some read of
a traveller in Egypt measuring a fallen column with his
cane, and finding it exactly five feet nine inches long; of
<pb>
his creeping through the mouth of a catacomb, and coming
out by a different hole from that he entered; of his steal-
ing the finger of an antique statue, in spite of the janizary
that watched him ; or his adding a new conjecture to the
hundred and fourteen conjectures already published, upon
the names of Osiris and Isis!
Methinks I hear some of my friends in China demand-
ing a similar account of London and the adjacent Tillages;
and if I remain here much longer, it is probable I may gra-
tify their curiosity. I intend, when run dry on other topics,
to take a serious survey of the city-wall; to describe that
beautiful building the Mansion-house; I will enumerate
the magnificent squares in which the nobility chiefly reside,
and the royal palaces appointed for the reception of the
English monarch; nor will I forget the beauties of Shoe
Lane, in which I myself have resided since my arrival.
You shall find me no way inferior to many of my brother
travellers in the art of description. At present, how-
ever, as a specimen of this way of writing, I send you a
few hasty remarks, collected in a late journey I made
to Kentish Town, and this in the manner of modern
voyagers.
" Having heard much of Kentish Town, I conceived a
strong desire to see that celebrated place. I could have
wished, indeed, to satisfy my curiosity without going
thither, but that was impracticable, and therefore I re-
solved to go. Travellers have two methods of going to
Kentish Town,—they take coach, which costs ninepence, or
they may go a-foot, which costs nothing: in my opinion, a
coach is by far the most eligible convenience, but I was
resolved to go on foot, having considered with myself, that
going in that manner would be the cheapest way.
" As you set out from Dog-house bar, you enter upon a
fine level road railed in on both sides, commanding on the
right a fine prospect of groves and fields, enamelled with
flowers, which would wonderfully charm the sense of
smelling, were it not for a dunghill on the left, which
mixes its effluvia with their odours. This dunghill is of
much greater antiquity than the road; and I must not
omit a piece of injustice I was going to commit upon this
occasion. My indignation was levelled against the makers
<pb>
of the dunghill, for having brought it so near the road;
whereas, it should have fallen upon the makers of the
road, for having brought that so near the dunghill.
" After proceeding in this manner for some time, a build-
ing, resembling somewhat a triumphal arch, salutes the
traveller's view. This structure, however, is peculiar to
this country, and vulgarly called a turnpike-gate: I could
perceive a long inscription, in large characters, on the
front, probably upon the occasion of some triumph, but,
being in haste, I left it to be made out by some subsequent
adventurer who may happen to travel this way; so, con-
tinuing my course to the west, I soon arrived at an un-
walled town, called Islington.1
" Islington is a pretty neat town, mostly built of brick,
with a church and bells ;2 it has a small lake, or rather
pond, in the midst, though at present very much neglected.
I am told it is dry in summer:3 if this be the case, it can
be no very proper receptacle for fish, of which the inhabi-
tants themselves seem sensible, by bringing all that is
eaten there from London.
" After having surveyed the curiosities of this fair and
beautiful town, I proceeded forward, leaving a fair stone
1 Dog-house bar is said to have been at the juncture of Old-street
and what is now the City-road, and it is hence assumed that this journey
to Islington, &c., was made by way of the City-road. The New-road
(afterwards City-road) was at this time being formed. Dog-house bar
was so called from its being near the Dog-house, where the City hounds
were kept.—ED.
2 This was just a little before Goldsmith came to live at, or near
Canonbury House. He, however, was fond of making excursions to
Islington. Cooke describes some of these of a few years later in the
European Magazine, Sept., 1793, p. 172, thus :—" Three or four of his
intimate friends rendezvoused at his chambers to breakfast about ten
o'clock in the morning ; at eleven they proceeded by the City Koad and
through the fields to Highbury Barn to dinner; about six o'clock in the
evening they adjourned to White Conduit House to drink tea ; and con-
cluded the evening by supping at the Grecian or Temple Exchange
Coffee House, or at the Globe in Fleet-street. There was a very good
ordinary of two dishes and pastry kept at Highbury Barn at this time
(about twenty-five years ago) at ten-pence per head, including a penny
to the waiter, and the company generally consisted of literary characters,
a few Templars, and some citizens who had left off trade."—ED.
3 Nelson thinks our author meant either the pond formerly on Islington-
green, or that which existed opposite Pullen's-row (' Hist. Islington,'
p. 40).—ED.
.'
<pb>
building, called the White Conduit House,1 on my right.
Here the inhabitants of London often assemble to celebrate
a feast of hot rolls and butter: seeing such numbers, each
with their little tables before them, employed on this
occasion, must, no doubt, be a very amusing sight to the
looker-on, but still more so to those who perform in the
solemnity.
" From hence I parted with reluctance to Pancras, as it
is written, or Pancridge, as it is pronounced; but which
should be both pronounced and written Pangrace: this
emendation I will venture meo arbitrio : Flap, in the Greek
language, signifies all, which, added to the English word
grace, maketh all grace, or Pangrace; and, indeed, this is a
very proper appellation to a place of so much sanctity as
Pangrace is universally esteemed. However this be, if you
except the parish church and its fine bells, there is little in
Pangrace worth the attention of the curious observer.
" From Pangrace to Kentish Town is an easy journey of
one mile and a quarter: the road lies through a fine
champaign country, well watered with beautiful drains,2
and enamelled with flowers of all kinds, which might con-
tribute to charm every sense, were it not that the odoriferous
gales are often more impregnated with dust than perfume.
" As you enter Kentish Town, the eye is at once presented
with the shops of artificers, such as venders of candles,
small-coal, and hair brooms ; there are also severaj august
buildings of red brick, with numberless sign posts, or rather
pillars, in a peculiar order of architecture. I send you a
drawing of several—vide A. B. C. This pretty town pro-
bably borrows its name from its vicinity to .the county of
Kent;3 and, indeed, it is not unnatural that it should, as
there are only London and the adjacent villages that lie
1 See also ' The Bee' No. 2,—" On Dress," vol. ii., p. 328, and else-
where.—ED.
2 The chief of these was the Fleet-ditch, whose covered course is
now marked by the names Fleet-road, Hampstead, and Fleet-street,
City.—ED.
3 Mr. Cunningham says Kentish Town was called Kaunteloe in the
fourteenth century. Pinks (' Hist. Clerkenwell') says the name is from
Caen or Ken ditch, that being the name of the Fleet ditch thereabout,
as coming from Caen or Ken wood; Mr. Hales (Athenteum, Jan. 26,
1884), also takes this view.—ED.
<pb>
between them. Be this as it will, perceiving night ap-
proach, I made a hasty repast on roasted mutton, and a
certain dried fruit called potatoes, resolving to protract my
remarks upon my return; and this I would very willingly
have done, but was prevented by a circumstance which, in
truth, I had for some time foreseen, for night coming on,
it was impossible to take a proper survey of the country,
as I was obliged to return home in the dark." Adieu.
LETTBE CXXIII.
To the Same.
THE CONCLUSION.1
AFTER a variety of disappointments, my wishes are at
length fully satisfied. My son, so long expected, is arrived,
at once, by his presence, banishing my anxiety, and opening
a new scene of unexpected pleasure. His improvements in
mind and person have far surpassed even the sanguine ex-
pectations of a father. I left him a boy, but he is returned
a man; pleasing in his person, hardened by travel, and
polished, by adversity. His disappointment in love, how-
ever, had infused an air of melancholy into his conversation,
.which seemed at intervals to interrupt our mutual satisfac-
tion. I expected that this could find a cure only from
time; but fortune, as if willing to load us with her favours,
has, in a moment, repaid every uneasiness with rapture.
Two days after his arrival, the man in black, with his
beautiful niece, came to congratulate us upon this pleasing
occasion; but, guess our surprise, when my friend's lovely
kinswoman was found to be the very captive my son had
rescued from Persia, and who had been wrecked on the
Wolga, and was carried by the Eussian peasants to the port
of Archangel. Were I to hold the pen of a novelist, I
might be prolix in describing their feelings at so unexpected
1 This concluding Letter is numbered CXVI. in the Public Ledger,
the date being August 14, 1761.—ED.
<pb>
an interview ; but you may conceive their joy without my
assistance: words were unable to express their transports,
then how can words describe it?
When two young persons are sincerely enamoured of
each other, nothing can give me such pleasure as seeing
them married: whether I know the parties or not, I am
happy at thus binding one link more in the universal chain.
Nature has, in some measure, formed me for a match-
maker, and given me a soul to sympathize with every mode
of human felicity. I instantly, therefore, consulted the
man in black, whether we might not crown their mutual
wishes by marriage: his soul seems formed of similar
materials with mine; he instantly gave his consent, and
the next day was appointed for the solemnization of their
nuptials.
All the acquaintances which I had made since my arrival,
were present at this gay solemnity. The little beau was
constituted master of the ceremonies, and his wife, Mrs.
Tibbs, conducted the entertainment with proper decorum.
The man in black, and the pawnbroker's widow, were very
sprightly and tender upon this occasion. The widow was
dressed up under the direction of Mrs. Tibbs; and as for
her lover, his face was set off by the assistance of a pig-tail
wig, which was lent by the little beau, to fit him for making
love with proper formality. The whole company easily
perceived that it would be a double wedding before all was
over, and, indeed, my friend and the widow seemed to make
no secret of their passion;' he even called me aside, in order
to know my candid opinion, whether I did not think him a
little too old to be married ? " As for my own part," con-
tinued he, " I know I am going to play the fool, but all «ay
friends will praise my wisdom, and produce me as the very
pattern of discretion to others." l
At dinner, every thing seemed to run on with good-
humour, harmony, and satisfaction. Every creature in
company thought themselves pretty, and every jest was
laughed at. The man in black sat next his mistress, helped,
her plate, chimed her glass, and jogging2 her knees and2 her
elbow, he whispered something arch in her ear, on which
she patted his cheek: never was antiquated passion so
'-' and J-2 Not in the Public Ledger.—ED.
<pb>
playful, so harmless, and amusing, as between this reverend
couple.1
2 The second course was now called for, and, among a
variety of other dishes, a fine turkey was placed before the
widow. The Europeans, you know, carve as they eat; my
friend, therefore, begged his mistress to help him to a part
of the turkey. The widow, pleased with an opportunity of
showing her skill in carving, an art upon which it seems she
piqued herself, began to cut it up by first taking off the leg.
" Madam," cries my friend, " if I might be permitted to
advise, I would begin by cutting off the wing, and then the
leg will come off more easily."—-" Sir," replies the widow,
" give me leave to understand cutting up a fowl: I always
begin with the leg."—"Yes, Madam," replies the lover,
" but if the wing be the most convenient manner, I would
begin with the wing."—" Sir," interrupts the lady, " when
you have fowls of your own, begin with the wing if you
please, but give me leave to take off the leg; I hope I am
not to be taught at this time of day."—" Madam," inter-
rupts he, " we are never too old to be instructed."—" Old,
Sir!" interrupts the other, " who is old, Sir ? when I die
of age, I know of some that will quake for fear: If the leg
does not come off, take the turkey to yourself."—" Madam,"
replied the man in black, " I don't care a farthing whether
the leg or the wing comes off; if you are for the leg first,
why you shall have the argument, even though it be as I
say."—" As for the matter of that," cries the widow, " I
don't care a fig whether you are for the leg off or on; and,
friend, for the future, keep your distance."—"O," replied the
other, " that is easily done; it is only removing to the other
end of the table; and so, Madam, your most obedient
humble servant."
Thus was this courtship of an age destroyed in one
moment; for this dialogue effectually broke off the match
between this respectable couple, that had been but just
concluded.2 The smallest accidents disappoint the most
1 The Ledger ends the paragraph thus:—" never was antiquated
passion so playful, harmless, and amusing."—ED.
2-2 This is an amplified account of the quarrel over the carving of the
turkey, apparently specially written for the' Citizen.' In the Ledger it
is represented only by the following: "A dispute, however, about
<pb>
important treaties. However, though it in some measure
interrupted the general satisfaction, it no ways lessened the
happiness of the youthful couple; and, by the young lady's
looks, I could perceive she was not entirely displeased with
this interruption.
In a few hours the whole transaction seemed entirely
forgotten, and we have all since enjoyed those satisfactions
which result from a consciousness of making each other
happy. My son and his fair partner are fixed here for life:
the man in black has given them up a small estate in the
country, which, added to what I was able to bestow, will be
capable of supplying all the real, but not the fictitious de-
mands of happiness. As for myself, the world being but
one city to me, I do not much care in which of the streets
I happen to reside: I shall, therefore, spend the remainder
of my life in examining the manners of different countries,
and have prevailed upon the man in black to be my com-
panion. " They must often change," says Confucius, " who
would be constant in happiness or wisdom." Adieu.1
carving one of the dishes effectually broke off the match between this
respectable couple. The smallest accidents disappoint," &c.—ED.
1 To this last paragraph of the concluding Letter in the Ledger
immediately succeeded the following announcement of the re-publication
in two volumes, though the title' Citizen of the World' is not mentioned.
" %* It may not be improper to inform the Public that these letters will
shortly be published in two volumes of the usual' Spectator' size. The
' numerous errors of the press are corrected, and the errors of the Writer,
' still, perhaps, more numerous, are retrenched, . Some new Letters are
' added, and others which were remarkable only for being dull, are wholly
' omitted. ' In short, such pains have been taken, that the Editor will,
'perhaps, receive more praise for his industry than the Writer for his
'genius. I could be jrrolix upon the present occasion, but shall be silent,
'for when we talk of ourselves, Vanity or Sestntmint have always too
' much to say." The threat of omitting the " dull" Letters did not
take effect. Every one of the series in the Public Ledger was collected
into the '. Citizen of the World,' and, as we have noted, a few Letters
were added. The first edition of the ' Cititizen of the World' appears
to have been published in March, 1762.—ED.
<pb>
APPENDIX
TO THIS EDITION OF THE ' CITIZEN OF THE
WORLD.'
TWO ESSAYS ATTRIBUTED TO GOLDSMITH.
I. THE BRAVERY OF THE ENGLISH COMMON SOLDIERS.1
BY those who have compared the military gemus of the
English wi^h that of the French nation, it is remarked, that
the French officers will always lead, if the soldiers will follow ;
and that the English soldiers will always follow, if their officers
will lead.
In all pointed sentences some degree of accuracy must
be sacrificed to conciseness; and, in this comparison, our
officers seem to lose what our soldiers gain. I know not
any reason for supposing that the English officers are less
willing than the French to lead; but it is, I think, univer-
sally allowed, that the English soldiers are more willing to
follow. Our nation may boast, beyond any other people in
the world, of a kind of epidemic bravery, diffused equally
through all its ranks. We can show a peasantry of heroes,
and fill our armies with clowns, whose courage may vie with
that of their general.2
1 For the grounds on which this and the following essay are attri-
buted to Goldsmith, see the remarks at the end of this Appendix. See
also Letter CXIX. of the ' Citizen of the World,' of which the above
essay oil' The Bravery of the Common Soldiers' is in some sort supple-
mentary. The above essay was published in the British Magazine, No. 1,
Jan. 1760, and it is now first included with the works of Goldsmith.—ED.
2 Compare Goldsmith's famous " a bold peasantry, their country's
pride," &c. (' Deserted Village,' 1. 55, &c.).—ED.
<pb>
There may be some pleasure in tracing the causes of this
plebeian magnanimity. The qualities which commonly
make an army formidable, are long habits of regularity,
great exactness of discipline, and great confidence in the
commander. Regularity may, in time, produce a kind of
mechanical obedience to signals and commands, like that
which the perverse Cartesians impute to animals; discipline
may impress such an awe upon the mind, that any danger
shall be less dreaded than the danger of punishment; and
confidence in the wisdom or fortune of the general, may
induce the soldiers to follow him blindly to the most
dangerous enterprise.
What may be done by discipline and regularity, may be
seen in the troops of the Eussian Empress, and Prussian
monarch. We find that they may be broken without con-
fusion, and repulsed without flight.
But the English troops have none of these requisites, in
any eminent degree. Regularity is by no means part of their
character : they are rarely exercised, and therefore show very
little dexterity in their evolutions as bodies OP" men, or in
the manual use of their weapons as individuals: they
neither are thought by others nor by themselves, more
active or exact than their enemies, and therefore derive
none of their courage from such imaginary superiority.
The manner in which they are dispersed in quarters over
the country, during times of peace, naturally produces
laxity of discipline ; they are very little in sight of their
officers; and when they are not engaged in the slight duty
of the guard, are suffered to live every m'an his own way.
The equality of English privileges, the impartiality of
our laws, the freedom of our tenures, and the prosperity of
our trade, dispose us very little to reverence of superiors.
It is not to any great esteem of the officers that the Eng-
lish soldier is indebted for his spirit in the hour of battle;
for perhaps it does not often happen that he thinks much
better of his leader than of himself. The French Count
who has lately published the ' Art of War,'1 remarks how
1 Marshal Count de Saxe. Griffiths' own marked copy of the Monthly
Beview, iiow in the Bodleian Library, shows that one of Goldsmith s
earliest articles in that review was upon Saxe's ' Art of War:' see
' Criticisms,' in our vol. iv.—ED.
<pb>
BBAVEBY OF COMMON SOLDIERS. 449
much soldiers are animated when they see all their dangers
shared by those who were born to be their masters, and
whom they consider as beings of a different rank. The
Englishman despises such motives of courage : he was born
without a master; and looks not on any man, however dig-
nified by lace or titles, as deriving from nature any claims
to his respect, or inheriting any qualities superior to his
own.
There are some, perhaps, who would imagine that every
Englishman fights better than the subjects of absolute
governments because he has more to defend. But what
has the English more than the French soldier ? Property
they are both commonly without. Liberty is, to the lowest
rank of every nation, little more than the choice of working
or starving; and this choice is, I Oppose, equally allowed
in every country. The English soldier seldom has his head
very full of the constitution; nor has there been, for more
than a century, any war that put the property or liberty of
a single Englishman in danger.
Whence then is the courage of the English vulgar ? It
proceeds, in my opinion, from that dissolution of depen-
dence which obliges every man to regard his own character.1
While every man is fed by his own hands, he has no need
of any servile arts: he may always have wages for his
labour; and is no less necessary to his employer than his
employer is to him. While he looks for no protection
from others, he is naturally roused to be his own protector;
and having nothing to abate his esteem of himself, he con-
sequently aspires to the esteem of others. Thus every man
that crowds our streets is a man of honour, disdainful of
obligation, impatient of reproach, and desirous of extending
his reputation among those of his own rank; and as courage
is in most frequent use, the fame of courage is most eagerly
pursued. From this neglect of subordination I do not
deny that some inconveniences may from time to time pro-
ceed: the power of the law does not always sufficiently
1 Compare with the last six lines of the ' Deserted Village.' To be
sure, four of these lines might be cited as favouring the idea that John-
son wrote this essay; but then, as we have said before (vol. ii., pp. 19,
141, &c.), there is, we think, only Boswell's word for the theory that
Johnson wrote the last four lines of the ' Deserted Village.'—ED.
in. a o
<pb>
supply the want of reverence, or maintain the proper dis-
tinction between different ranks: but good and evil will
grow up in this world together; and they who complain,
in peace, of the insolence of the populace, must remember
that their insolence in peace is bravery in war.
I am one of those who conceive the highest expectations
from the effects of that universal contempt which the pub-
lic, at present, seem to entertain of our land officers, should
any great occasion agayi call them to action. The sense of
shame may perform wnat the sense of duty failed in, and
emulation may yet bring them back to the virtues of their
ancestors.2
When the great orator of Eome was complimenting the
dictator on his victories, he put him in mind that they
were in a great measure owing to the courage of his
officers. But where is the English officer who could make
such an harangue to George H. ? The only two military
actions of his long reign that have not been memorable by
misfortune, or stained by disgrace, were the two actions in
which he and his son commanded in person; those of
Dettingen and Culloden. Can it be believed in future
times, that generals at the head of armies as brave as those
that Caesar commanded, and better appointed than those
that Marlborough led to the field—but here I must check
my pen in pity—let me say in justice to the parties, their
1 From the Literary Magazine, March, 1758, where it has, in letter
fashion, the heading—" To the Author: Sir," and the signature—" I
am, your constant Eeader, BRITO." The title heading is as above, but
over the article in the succeeding pages of the magazine runs—" A
Review of English Courage from the Conquest."—ED.
3 These remarks, and more to the same effect at the end of the essay,
seem to show that the occasion of writing had to do with the scandal
prevailing at the time consequent upon the trials by Court Martial of
Admiral Byng and General Sir John Mordaunt. The trial of Byng re-
sulted in his execution on March 14, 1757 ; that of Mordaunt ended in
an acquittal, Dec. 1757.—ED.
</div>
<pb>
<div id="character of english officers" code="2" wordcount="4157">
virtues, perhaps, by this time are roused, and they begin
to recollect that they are Britons.
How different is the fate of his present Majesty from
that of all his august predecessors. Let us take a short
review of their history since the conquest. It may in-
spirit our English officers with ideas of their own impor-
tance, by setting before their eyes the glories of their fore-
fathers.
It was an English officer, and the descendant of English
officers, who, when one of the boldest and most encroaching
of our princes questioned his property, and demanded by
what right he held it, drew forth his sword, and gave that
as his answer; and succeeding times have recorded it with
justice and applause. The sword is the noblest as well as
the most ancient tenure of possession. The officers of the
Conqueror were by him treated on a footing of equality,
and looked upon themselves as having the same title to
their estates as he had to his crown. It was to them he
owed it, nor did our first princes, after the conquest, ever
consider their own presence either in England or in France
to be necessary for their success. They knew themselves
to be well served ; because their generals and officers were
men of principle, and in those days a large property was
so far from being the damper, that it was the incentive, of
courage.
The liberties of England can be safe only in the hands
of Englishmen, and formerly, military command was always
proportioned to actual property, on this presumption, that,
the more a party possesses, the greater is his interest, and
the stronger will be his endeavours to protect and defend
it. An English king, upon the same principle, looked upon
his own honour and interest to be inseparably connected
with those of his officers ; he therefore trusted them, and
was bravely served. But there is one remarkable circum-
stance to' the honour of the English officers, that though
the French possessions, of many of our kings were equal, if
not superior, to their English, yet we never knew them
served by French officers in England, though they trusted
their most important concerns in France to English officers.
While our kings were in England, the English headed their
armies in France, and every year added fresh wreaths to
<pb>
the brows of the Talbots, Salisburys, the Mowbrays, and a
hundred other illustrious names of antiquity.1
This observation is the more remarkable, as commotions
and rebellions were as frequent in their English as in their
French dominions, yet they depended upon English officers
only for the suppression of both. If we read old Froissart,
who was himself an officer under Edward III,, our breasts
glow with the ideas he inspires of the gallantry, the polite-
ness, and the courage of his brother officers. Every one
of them seems to be a hero designed by nature to do
honour to his country, and though the arms of Edward
make the principal figure in the escutcheon, those of his
officers complete the achievement of his glory. To par-
ticularize hundreds of them would be doing injustice to
as many more who are equally illustrious in the records of
fame."
An old English officer looked upon execution and com-
mand to be almost the same thing. When their own or
their country's honour was at stake, the thoughts of danger
never mingled in their ideas. " How many men have the
French ? " said Henry the Vth to David Gam. " Enough,"
replied the gallant officer, "to fight, enough to kill, and
enough to run away."3 This reply may serve to give us a
lively notion of the ancient spirit of English officers, and
so exalted was then their character, that our greatest
Princes often served in their own armies in subordinate
commands, without assuming any distinction but what they
acquired by their courage and virtue. Such was Henry V.
who served at the battle of Agincourt (the most glorious
that history can produce) under old Sir Thomas Erping-
ham, a knight of the Bath; and Edward HI. acquired as
1 Compare with the curious account of "old James Talbot," &c., in
our restored passages of the essay on the ' Boar's Head Tavern in East-
cheap,' vol. i., p. 287, &c.—ED.
2 In ' The History of Our Own Language' (in the later collected
Essays of our vol. iv.), there is, at the end of a similar grouping of
famous names—" and a hundred others, who by being not named are
injured by particularizing any."—ED.
3 In his ' History of England in a Series of Letters from a Nobleman
to His Son,' 1764, and later in his ' History of England,' 4 vols., 1771,
Goldsmith tells the story of the rescue of Henry V. at the battle of
Agincourt by " David Gam, a valiant Welshman," &c.—ED.
<pb>
an English officer those laurels that afterwards graced him
as an English monarch.
This generous spirit descended from father to son, and I
remember in all our old history but one instance of an
English officer being broken, and that, too, was not for
cowardice, but for effeminacy; for, being unpracticed iu
arms, he dropt from his hand the standard of England,
which he had the honour to carry in his master's presence,
who bestowed it upon his younger brother, as being the
more " hardy knight."
But the spirit of English officers was not confined to
military virtues, or to that rude undiscernment of the justice
or injustice of a cause that is too common to camps. They
had sentiments of liberty and loyalty as well as of courage,
and though the nation was often unhappily divided in point
of principle, yet every officer of England was a man of
principle. When the succession to the crown came to be
disputed, each followed the dictates of his conscience, and
adhered to the party he believed to be in the right. There
was no neutrality, no lukewarmness, no Atticism amongst
them, and all we can lament is, that the excess of their
virtue was a continual source of calamity to their country.
But when those civil commotions were stilled, how nobly
did the same virtues operate to the honour of their sove-
reign and the glory of England! After the strength of
feudal tenures had been broken by Henry VH., the officers
who served under his grand-daughter were generally such
men as our army is composed of at this day; they were
subject to a martial law much more severe and arbitrary
than what is in force at present, but we know of no abuses
it ever introduced, we know of no job it ever gratified, and
of no coward it ever screened.
While Elizabeth was planning in her closet, or debating
in her council, she thought her glory safe in the hands of
her officers, and a very slight suspicion of its having
suffered under the greatest favourite she ever had, cost
that favourite, first his liberty, and then his head. When
an officer (as was often the case under Elizabeth) was
enriched by the spoils of his enemies' country, either by sea
or land, he was so far from looking upon his wealth as
manumission from his duty, that he returned to it with
<pb>
double ardour. Sir Walter Raleigh, who was himself but
a soldier of fortune, though he acquired a larger estate
than any officer in our service now possesses, was per-
petually courting opportunities of making additions to his
glory when he could make none to his riches. Notwith-
standing a mutual hatred that had always subsisted be-
tween him and the Earl of Essex, yet the honour and in-
terest of their mistress and their country never failed to
unite them in their service. Though she was the most
cautious, and at the same time the most frugal sovereign
that ever sat on a throne, yet she embraced all opportuni-
ties of forming continental connections, and of sending her
armies abroad. Even the bad use Leicester made of his
power and her favour, did not damp her zeal for the pro-
testant cause, and the minister who should have endea-
voured to have dissuaded her from supporting her pro-
testant friends abroad would have felt her fist as well as
her frown.
It was the opinion she had of the honour of her officers
that inspired her with this confidence. " What toils do I
undergo," said the brave Greek, " O Athenians, that I may
merit your approbation." " You see, madam," said an
English officer to his wife, pointing to a regiment that he
had raised at his own expense, " what I do for the chance
of making you a lady!" for knighthood, upon his return,
was all the reward he expected.
Though this was a very gallant compliment to her lady-
ship, yet we are not to imagine that vanity was this officer's
motive for his public spirit. The frugal honour he aspired
to he knew could not be obtained but by actions that
merited the approbation of his country, and must throw
lustre upon his family. The 95Z. Is. and 6d. now paid for
the fees of knighthood formed but a small pittance of the
expense this officer was at to deserve it; and it is plain he
looked upon it in the same light as the Roman generals
did on the laurels they wore by consent of the senate.
The wars which at the time of Elizabeth's death con-
tinued in the Low countries, were the nurseries of English
soldiers, and bred, even during the pacific reign of James I.,
many gallant officers. James in this respect imitated the
conduct of Elizabeth; for though himself averse to war,
<pb>
yet not knowing how soon he might have use for soldiers,
he encouraged a martial spirit amongst his officers, and the
Montjoys, Veres, Cecils, and many others, were reckon'd
the best of any in Europe at that time. Their pay and
perquisites as soldiers were, indeed, inconsiderable, but
they were amply remunerated in other respects. Their
courage, their virtue, and their generous contempt both of
ease and wealth, that ought to characterize every English
officer, gave them, in the eyes of their country, a rank and
distinction that neither birth nor titles can bestow.
This public approbation was not confin'd to barren
praise, but was often productive of a flourishing and
durable settlement of their fortune, and it is the glory of
some of the noblest families now in England, that merit in
the field was rewarded by beauty at the court, and both
have concurred together to transmit their honours to
posterity.
I cannot, however, help remarking here, that one pecu-
liarity distinguishes the officers of England, from those of
all other countries, and that, too, to their glory. The Scots,
the Irish, the Germans, and those of several other nations
were so much soldiers of fortune, that they courted her in
every clime and in every service, even when the distresses
of their own country demanded their swords. But the
English never forgot what they owed to England, and
looked upon themselves as Englishmen in whatever clime
they served. This was a duty so well understood, that
some of them, after they had performed great services to
foreign princes, were rewarded by offers of the highest dis-
tinctions, which they refused to accept of without their
native sovereign's leave; and one nobleman of the fore-
most merit fell under the displeasure of Queen Elizabeth
for having the title and dignity of a count of the empire,
in a manner, forced upon him, for the great services he
had performed for the imperial court; so sacred did she
think the character of an English officer ought to be, and
so devoted to the service of his own country alone.
TJpon the breaking out of the civil war between
Charles I. and his parliament, it is incredible what a
number of English officers flock'd to the standards of their
country. The greatest number joined Charles, and in the
<pb>
beginning of the war (that is at the time his cause was
worst) his arms throve the best. But Cromwell found out
the secret of opposing a principle of enthusiasm to the
sense of honour, and his troops having been before dis-
ciplined by Essex, Fairfax, Waller, Skippon, Massey, and
many other officers who had likewise served abroad, the
match was no longer equal; for when the cause of Charles
became that of the constitution, it was overborne by a
spirit that humanity is unable to resist, by great abilities
directing great enthusiasm.
The corruption, ease, and effeminacy of the reign of
Charles II. did not extinguish the courage, or affect the
virtue of his officers, and so far were they from forgetting
they were Englishmen, that the very intimations they gave
in favour of liberty, upon the acquittal of the bishops,
were heard from Hounslow to London, and made King
James tremble in his camp. Their subsequent conduct
was of a piece, there scarcely was a protestant that bore a
commission in the English army who was found mean and
dastardly enough to comply either with threats or pro-
mises, when he thought his country, religion, and liberty
were in danger; and perhaps no history can parallel the
unanimity with which they showed themselves ready to
resign their commissions, when their services to their
masters became incompatible with those to their country.
This behaviour was the more glorious from the considera-
tion that Bang James had it more in his power than, per-
haps, any sovereign either before or since, to have gratified
both their ambition and avarice, had they been disposed to
enter into his measures. ATI immense civil list had been
settled upon him by parliament, and he had saved more
money than any prince in Europe was at that time master
of, not to mention that the aspect of his affairs through the
late defeat of Monmouth, and many other concurring
causes were extremely favourable for his designs.
King William not only owed his throne but his glory to
the courage and virtue of English officers. Seldom fortu-
nate in his own person, he was often obliged to trust to his
generals and officers, and where English ones commanded,
he never was either betrayed or disappointed.
The same spirit exerted itself in a more full and glorious
<pb>
manner under Queen Ann. The question amongst her
officers was, not how to avoid danger, but how to meet it, so
. as to turn it to their own honour and the service of their
country. Parties in her time ran higher than they have
ever done since, and pamphlet writing was more in vogue
then than it is now, yet we may challenge the ablest advocate
for military cautionl to show that the expression was ever
heard of in all the various expeditions that were projected
in her reign; or that parties ever were divided, and
pamphlets wrote upon the subject of safety or not safety,
the construction of orders, the appearance of opposition, the
supposition of danger.
But let us hide, if possible, even from ourselves, all re-
flection upon what has lately happened. The English spirit
continues amongst officers as well as soldiers still the same,
. and requires only to be awakened. Even the Roman mili-
tary virtues, at one period of their republic, appeared to be
languid, but it was in appearance only. For their senate
found the means to inspire their soldiers with a fear that
was stronger than the fear of death, I mean the fear of
public infamy,2 the fear of being slaves to the worst of
tyrants, to traitors and cowards of their own country, who
avail'd themselves of command only to make rich, and
exerted no other parts of military discipline but those of
plundering, harassing, and hectoring their inferiors.
I am, Your Constant Reader,
BBITO.
The foregoing two essays we venture to reprint here, and for the
first time with Goldsmith's works, adducing the following as grounds for
viewing them as at least possibly by our author, and hence, in a measure,
supplementary of the admired Letter CXIX. of the ' Citizen of the
World,'' On the Distresses of the Poor, exemplified in the Life of a
Private Sentinel.'
Concerning the first essay—' The Bravery of the English Common
Soldiers'—Sir James Prior wrote in 1837 (' Life of Goldsmith,' vol. i.,
1 Yet " military caution" seems really to have been poor Byng's
offence, if offence it was; and Mordaunt's case does not look very diffe-
rent, except in its result.—ED.
2 Compare this passage with the concluding remarks in the, as we as-
sume, companion essay, • The Bravery of the English Common Soldiers,'
' Whence then is the courage of the English vulgar ? " &c., p. 449.—ED.
<pb>
L349): "Boswell informs us that it was added to the 'Idler' by
. Johnson when first collected into volumes; but in this he errs,
for it was neither added by him, nor is it to be found in the early
editions of that work, and for all that appears may have been included
afterwards without sufficient inquiry.' So great was the reputation of
that eminent writer, that any original paper from him would have been
announced with every degree of publicity and triumph, as were those
simply reprinted, from other sources. Thus in the same number of the
Magazine, the 89th paper of the ' Idler,'8 then in course of publication,
is republished with the following introductory remark :—' The reader,
we imagine, will not be displeased to learn, that we propose to enrich
every number of the British Magazine with one paper from the ' Idler,'
by permission of the author, whose great genius and extensive learning
may be justly numbered among the most shining ornaments of the pre-
sent age.' Other reasons for questioning its origin, in consequence of
this ambiguity, appear in the allusions, several of which may be found
in other parts of the writings of Goldsmith: he further pursued the sub-
ject in the magazine for June, the ' Distresses of a Common Soldier,' re-
printed in the ' Citizen of the World,' and again in the volume of
'Essays' in 1765, a paper which has been much praised by French
critics as breathing the spirit of an humble optimist. It would appear,
therefore, that Boswell was unacquainted with the previous publication
of the essay in this magazine; and likewise that Smollett, or whoever
officiated as editor, knew not or considered it not to be written by John-
son, or they would have proclaimed the honour for the credit of their
work." The circumstances here detailed (all of which we have verified)
prove almost conclusively, we think, that this ' Bravery' paper was not
written by Johnson; while most of them furnish some evidence favour-
ing the supposition that the essay may have been written by Goldsmith.
In addition to the latter count comes the following, which we think tends
to show that the second essay,' On the Character of English Officers,'
may have been a companion essay to the first, and that, therefore,
possibly, both are by Goldsmith.
The second essay was published, as we have stated, in the Literary
1 Boswell says (Napier's 8vo ed., vol. i., p. 269): " To the ' Idler '
when collected in volumes he [Johnson] added, besides the Essay on
Epitaphs [? that in the Gentleman's Mag."\, and the Dissertation on those
of Pope [? that in the Universal Visitor}, an essay on the Bravery of
the English Common Soldiers." But really neither this ' Bravery' essay
nor the other two mentioned as " added " appear in the first collected
edition of the 'Idler' (2 vols. 12mo, Newbery, 1761). The Oxford
edition of Johnson's Works, 1825, gives the ' Bravery of the English
Common Soldiers,' but not in the ' Idler.' The editor of the Oxford
edition states that the essay was added to the ' Idler' after Johnson's
death, and he seems doubtful of its being by Johnson.—ED.
2 No. 89 of ' The Idler' (No. 88 in the 1761 republication) ' What
have ye done ? ' appeared in The Universal Chronicle of Dec. 22, 1759,
and was reprinted in the British Magazine of Jan. 1760, as here
mentioned. —ED .
<pb>
Magazine of March, 1758, where it was signed ' Brito.' This signature
is the same as that of the first article on ' Our Own Language,' appear-
ing in the previous number of the same magazine, an article also attri-
buted to Goldsmith, and on that account reprinted in our vol. iv. The
present essay ' On the Character of English Officers,' too, appears next
in order to the second part of the ' Our Own Language' article in the
March magazine; and the fact that it is signed ' Brito' may account for
the second part of the ' Own Language' article not being so signed (as
was the first). It would not have been good policy to have two articles
in succession signed with the same signature, even though they were by
the same writer. An additional slight help to the argument that this
article upon ' Officers' is by Goldsmith may, perhaps, be yielded by our
author's reference to the " valour " (questionable) of the officers of his
time, made in Letter LXXXV. of the ' Citizen of the World,' see p. 321
of the present volume.
Supposing both essays to be by Goldsmith, we can imagine thorn as
both written for the Literary Magazine, when the author was publishing
his other papers in that magazine (1758); but the one on 'Officers'
being there printed, and the one on ' Common Soldiers' being not there
printed, and the Literary Magazine stopping with the August number
of that year, the earliest opportunity for using the second essay occurred
seventeen months later, when Goldsmith was engaged to contribute to
the first number of the British Magazine (Jan. 1760). Concerning
Goldsmith's undoubted connection with both the Literary Magazine and
the British Magazine, at the several times when the above two essays
were there published, further particulars will be found at vol. i. pp. 406-8,
and in the notes to the Later Collected Essays in vol. iv.—ED.
<pb>
</div>
<pb>
<div id="polite learning in europe" code="3" wordcount="25120">
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE PRESENT STATE
POLITE LEARNING IN EUROPE.
<pb>
[The ' Enquiry' was Goldsmith's first published book, and the first of
his works that really attracted the attention of the literary world. The
first edition was published in April, 1759, without the author's name, R.
and J. Dodsley, Fall Mall, being the publishers. The author was at the
time in great distress, as will be seen by reference to our' Life,' p. 18,
and to pp. 438, 445, 447 of the Letters. In the letter to Mrs. Lawder,
and that to Robert Bryanton, both dated Aug. 1758, it appears that
Goldsmith then proposed to call the work ' An Essay on the Present
State of Taste and Literature in Europe;' see Letters, pp. 437, 441.
The revision for the second edition was one of Goldsmith's latest tasks ;
and the result, bearing his name, appeared in 1774, three months after
his death. The second edition excluded about a fifth of the work as it
first appeared, the rejected portion comprising two entire chapters, one
on the Decline of Ancient and Modern Learning, and one on Learning
in England and France, several trenchant passages on the Stage, and
the translation from Macrobius, since given in the Poems (see p. 75,
vol. ii.). The work is of much biographical interest; and from this
point of view the portions of the first edition which Goldsmith left out
of the second edition are at least as important as those he allowed to
remain. The following text is that of the second edition, but with the
omitted portions of the first edition added in foot-notes and an Appen-
dix (see p. 529). Other editions of Goldsmith have given some of these
rejected portions; the present is the first edition to give the whole of
them.—ED.]
<pb>
CHAP. PAGE
I. Introduction ......... 465
II. The Causes which contribute to the Decline of Learning. 467
III. A View of the Obscure Ages ...... 476
IV. Of the present state of Polite Learning in Italy . . 479
V. Of Polite Learning in Germany 483
VI. Of Polite Learning in Holland, and some other countries
of Europe ......... 487
VII. and VIII. Of Polite Learning in France. . . . 491
IX. Of Learning in Great Britain 498
X. Of Rewarding Genius in England 500
XI. Of the Marks of Literary Decay in France and England 510
XII. Of the Stage 516
XIII. On Universities 521
XIV. The Conclusion 526
APPENDIX.
Being portions of the first edition which were .
omitted in the second edition, viz.:—
IV. A Parallel Between the Rise and Decline of Ancient and
Modern Learning 529
VII. The Polite Learning of England and France incapable of
Comparison ........ 530
XII. (Parts of) Of the Stage 536
<pb>
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE PRESENT STATE
POLITE LEARNING.
'Eftoi irpoQ ijn\oaoij>(n>i- eari <fn\ia' irpi>£ [lev <ro0i<rreif r\
6vre vvv tan ipiXm jirfrt vartpov wore yivoiro.'
Tolerabile si sedificia nostra diruerent sedificandi capaces.2
CHAPTEE I.
INTRODUCTION.
IT has been so long the practice to represent literature
as declining, that every renewal of this complaint now
comes with diminish'd influence. The public has been so
often excited by a false alarm, that at present the nearer
we approach the threatened period of decay, the more our
security increases.
3 It will now probably be said, that, taking the decay of
genius for granted, as I do, argues either resentment or
partiality.3 The writer possessed of fame, it may be as-
serted, is willing to enjoy it without a rival, by lessening
1 "I have a regard for philosophers; but I neither have, nor ever
can have, any respect for sophists or pedantic grammarians."—B.
2 " It might be borne, if our public buildings were pulled down only
by persons who have sufficient skill to restore them."—B.
8-3 " To deplore the prostitution of learning, and despise cotemporary
merit, it must be owned, have too often been the resource of the envious
or disappointed, the dictates of resentment not impartiality."—First
edit.
III. H H
<pb>
every competitor; or, if unsuccessful, he is desirous to
turn upon others the contempt which is levelled at himself,
and being convicted at the bar of literary justice, hopes for
pardon by accusing every brother of the same profession.
Sensible of this, I am at a loss where to find an apology
for persisting to arraign the merit of the age; for joining
in a cry which the judicious have long since left to be kept
up by the vulgar; and for adopting the sentiments of the
multitude, in a performance that at best can please only a
few.
Complaints of our degeneracy in literature, as well as in
morals, I own, have been frequently exhibited of late; but
seem to be enforced more with the ardour of devious decla-
mation than the calmness of deliberate enquiry. The dullest
critic, who strives at a reputation for delicacy, by showing
he cannot be pleased, may pathetically assure us that our
taste is upon the decline; may consign every modern per-
formance to oblivion, and bequeath nothing to posterity,
except the labours of our ancestors, or his own. Such
general invective, however, conveys no instruction; all it
teaches is, that the writer dislikes ah age by which he is
probably disregarded. The manner of being useful on the
subject would be, to point out the symptoms, to investigate
the causes, and direct to the remedies of the approaching
decay. This is a subject hitherto unattempted in criticism,
—perhaps it is the only subject in which criticism can be
useful.1
How far the writer is equal to such an undertaking, the
reader must determine; * yet, perhaps,2 his observations
may be just, though his manner of expressing them should
1 " To mark out, therefore, the corruptions that have found way into
the republic of letters, to attempt the rescuing of genius from the shackles
of pedantry and criticism, to distinguish the decay naturally consequent
on an age like ours, grown old in literature, from every erroneous inno-
vation which admits a remedy, to take a view of those societies which
profess the advancement of polite learning, and by a mutual opposition
of their excellencies and defects, to attempt the improvement of each, is
the design of this essay."—First edit.
2-2 " But this may be asserted without the imputation of vanity, that
he enters the lists with no disappointments to bias his judgment, nor
will he ever reprove but with a desire to reform. The defects of his
execution may be compensated by the usefulness of his design," &c.—
First edit.
<pb>
only serve as an example of the errors he undertakes to
reprove.1
Novelty, however, is not permitted to usurp the place of
reason; it may attend, but shall not conduct the enquiry.
But it should be observed, that the more original any per-
formance is, the more it is liable to deviate ; for cautious
stupidity is always in the right.2
CHAPTEK H.
THE CAUSES WHICH COKTRIBUTE TO THE DECLINE OF
LEABNINQ.3
IF we consider the revolutions which have happened in
the commonwealth of letters, survey the rapid progress of
learning in one period of antiquity, or its amazing decline
in another, we shall be almost induced to accuse nature of
partiality; as if she had exhausted all her efforts in adorn-
ing one age, while she left the succeeding entirely neglected.
It is not to nature, however, but to ourselves alone, that this
1 " If the present enquiry were a topic of speculative curiosity, calculated
to fill up a few vacant moments in literary indolence, I should think my
labour ill bestowed. To rank in the same despicable class with the dis-
sertations, enigmas, problems, and other periodical compilations with
which even idleness is cloyed at present, is by no means my ambition.
True learning and true morality are closely connected; to improve the
head will insensibly influence the heart; a deficiency of taste and a
corruption of manners are sometimes found mutually to produce each
other.
" Dissenting from received opinions may frequently render this essay
liable to correction, yet the reader may be assured that a passion for
singularity never gives rise to the error. Novelty," &c.—First edit.
1 " In literature as in commerce, the value of the acquisition is gene-
rally proportioned to the hazard of the adventure. I shall think, there-
fore, with freedom, and bear correction with candour. It is but just
that he who dissents from others, should not be displeased if others
differ from him. The applause of a few, a very few, will satisfy
ambition; and even ill-nature must confess, that I have been willing
to advance the reputation of the age at the hazard of my own."—First
edit.
3 The heading of this chapter in the first edition is, " Of the decline
of ancient learning."—ED.
<pb>
partiality must be ascribed; the seeds of excellence are
sown in every age, and it is wholly owing to a wrong direc-
tion in the passions or pursuits of mankind that they have
not received the proper cultivation.1
As, in the best regulated societies, the very laws which
at first give the government solidity, may in the end con-
tribute to its dissolution, so the efforts which might have
promoted learning in its feeble commencement, may, if con-
tinued, retard its progress. The paths of science, which
were at first intricate, because untrodden, may at last grow
toilsome, because too much frequented. As learning ad-
vances, the candidates for its honours become more nume-
rous, and the acquisition of fame more uncertain: the
modest may despair of attaining it, and the opulent think
it too precarious to pursue ; thus the task of supporting
the honour of the times may at last devolve on indigence
and'effrontery, while learning must partake of the contempt
of its professors.
To illustrate these assertions, it may be proper to take a
slight review of the decline of ancient learning; to consider
how far its depravation was owing to the impossibility of
supporting continued perfection; in what respects it pro-
ceeded from voluntary corruption; and how far it was
hastened On by accident. If modern learning be compared
with ancient, in these different lights, a parallel between
both, which has hitherto produced only vain dispute, may
contribute to amusement, perhaps instruction. We shall
thus be enabled to perceive what period of antiquity the
present age most resembles; whether we are making ad-
vances towards excellence, or retiring again to primeval
obscurity: we shall thus be taught to acquiesce in those
defects which it is impossible to prevent, and reject all
faulty innovations, though offered under the specious titles
of improvement.2
1 " It is not nature that is fatigued with producing her wonders, so
much as we that are satiated with admiration."—First edit.
' " In early ages, when man was employed in acquiring necessary sub-
sistence, or in defending his acquisitions, when without laws or society
he led a precarious life, while even the savage rivalled him in the
dominion of the forest; in such times of fatigue and darkness we must
not look for the origin of arts or learning, which are the offspring of
security, opulence, and ease. When experience taught the advantages
<pb>
Learning, when planted in any country, is transient and
fading, nor does it flourish till slow gradations of improve-
ment have naturalized it to the soil. It makes feeble ad-
vances, begins among the vulgar, and rises into reputation
among the great. It cannot be established in a state at
once, by introducing the learned of other countries ; these
may grace a court, but seldom enlighten a kingdom.
Ptolemy Philadelphus, Constantine Porphyrogeneta, Alfred,
or Charlemagne, might have invited learned foreigners into
their dominions, but could not establish learning. While
in the radiance of royal favour, every art and science seemed
to flourish; but when that was withdrawn, they quickly
felt the rigours of a strange climate, and with exotic con-
stitutions perished by neglect.
As the arts and sciences are slow in coming to maturity,
it is requisite, in order 'to their perfection, that the state
should be permanent which gives them reception. There
are numberless attempts without success, and experiments
without conclusion, between the first rudiments of an art
and its utmost perfection; between the outlines of a shadow,
and the picture of an Apelles. Leisure is required to go
through the tedious interval, to join the experience of pre-
decessors to our own, or enlarge our views by building on
the ruined attempts of former adventurers. All this may
be performed in a society of long continuance, but if the
kingdom be but of short duration, as was the case of
Arabia, learning seems coeval, sympathizes with its political
struggles, and is annihilated in its dissolution.
But permanence in a state is not alone sufficient; it is
requisite, also, for this end, that it should be free. Natu-
ralists assure us, that all animals are sagacious, in propor-
tion as they are removed from the tyranny of others. In
native liberty, the elephant is a citizen, and the beaver an
architect; but whenever the tyrant man intrudes upon their
community, their spirit is broken, they seem anxious only
for safety, and their intellects suffer an equal diminution
of society, when native freedom was exchanged for social security, when
man began to feel the benefit of laws, and the mind had leisure for the
contemplation of nature and itself, then, probably, the sciences might
have been cultivated to add strength to the rising community, and the
polite arts introduced to promote its enjoyment."—First edit.
<pb>
with their prosperity.1 The parallel will hold with regard
to mankind. Fear naturally represses invention—benevo-
lence, ambition ; for, in a nation of slaves, as in the despotic
governments of the East, to labour after fame is to be a
candidate for danger.
To attain literary excellence also, it is requisite that the
soil and climate should, as much as possible, conduce to
happiness. The earth must supply man with the neces-
saries of life, before he has leisure or inclination to pursue
more refined enjoyments.* The climate, also, must be
equally indulgent; for, in too warm a region, the mind is
relaxed into languor, and, by the opposite excess, is chilled
into torpid inactivity.
These are the principal advantages which tend to the
improvement of learning;3 and all these were united in the
states of Greece and Rome.
We must now examine what hastens, or prevents its
decline.3
Those who behold the phenomena of nature, and content
themselves with the view, without enquiring into their causes,
are perhaps wiser than is generally imagined. In this
manner, our rude ancestors were acquainted with facts ;
and Poetry, which helped the imagination and the memory,
was thought the most proper vehicle for conveying their
knowledge to posterity. It was the poet who harmonized
the ungrateful accents of his native dialect, who lifted it
above common conversation, and shaped its rude combina-
tions into order. From him the orator formed a style ;
and, though poetry first rose out of prose, in turn it gave
birth to every prosaic excellence. Musical period, concise
expression, and delicacy of sentiment, were all excellencies
derived from the poet; in short, he not only preceded, but
formed the orator, philosopher, and historian.
When the observations of past ages were collected, Philo-
sophy next began to examine their causes. She had num-
berless facts from which to draw proper inferences, and
1 Compare the author in his Natural History : see the extracts from
' Animated Nature' in our vol. iv. " On the Sheep," &c.—ED.
* Compare Letter LXXXII. of the ' Citizen of the World.'—ED.
3-s After learning: " Encouragement from the great is useful in pre-
venting its decline. Those who behold," Sic.—First edit.
<pb>
Poetry had taught her the strongest expression to enforce
them.1 Thus, the Greek philosophers, for instance,1 exerted
all their happy talents in the investigation of truth, and
the production of beauty. 2 They saw, that there2 was more
excellence in captivating the judgment, than in raising a
momentary astonishment. In their arts, they imitated only
such parts of nature as might please in the representation ;
in the sciences, they cultivated such parts of knowledge as
it was every man's duty to know.3 Thus, learning was en-
couraged, protected, honoured, and, in its turn, adorned,
strengthened, and harmonized the community.4
5 But, as the mind is vigorous5 and active, and experiment
is dilatory and painful, the spirit of philosophy being
excited, the reasoner, when destitute of experiment, had
recourse to theory, and gave up what was useful for refine-
ment.
Critics, sophists, grammarians, rhetoricians, and com-
mentators, now began to figure in the literary common-
wealth. In the dawn of science such are generally modest,
1.1 " The Greeks (for we know little of the Egyptian learning) now
exerted," &c.—First edit.
'.' " Before this the works of art were remarkable only for their vast-
ness of design, and seemed the productions of giants, not of ordinary
men ; learning was another name for magic, or, to give it its real appella-
tion, imposture. But these improvers saw that," &c.—First edit.
3 " Unity, variety, and proportion charmed in all their designs;
liberty, patriotism, and a subjection to the laws were what all their true
philosophers strove to inculcate."—First edit.
* " From being the disciple of Greece, Rome soon became its rival, and
was as much esteemed for its improvements in the arts of peace as feared
for its achievements in those of war. The Romans understood, perhaps
better than their masters, the manner of blending art and science for
their mutual improvement. By this means their philosophy acquired
more grace, and then: poetry more sentiment. They entirely banished
that magical obscurity, which the Greeks first borrowed from other
nations, and some part of which their most admired writers thought
proper still to retain. The learning of the Romans might justly be
styled, the truest refinement on common sense, it was therefore a proper
instrument in the hands of ambition. Their most powerful men not
only encouraged, but became themselves the finest models of literary
perfection. Thus the arts add sciences went on together, and reason-
ing proceeded no farther, than where experiment pointed out the way."
—First edit.
•.' " But as the operations of the body are slow, those of the mind
vigorous," &c.—First edit.
<pb>
and not entirely useless. Their performances serve to mark
the progress of learning, though they seldom contribute to
its improvement. But as nothing but speculationl was re-
quired in making proficients in their respective depart-
ments, so neither the satire nor the contempt of the wise,
though Socrates was of the number, nor the laws levelled
at them by the state, though Cato was in the legislature,
could prevent their approaches.2 Possessed of all the ad-
vantages of unfeeling dulness, laborious, insensible, and
persevering, they still proceeded mending and mending
every work of genius, or, to speak without irony, under-
mining all that was polite and useful. Libraries were
loaded,3 but not enriched, with their labours, while the fa-
tigues of reading their explanatory comments was tenfold
that which might suffice for understanding the original,
and their works effectually increased our application, by
professing to remove it.
Against so obstinate and irrefragable an enemy, what
could avail the unsupported sallies of genius, or the oppo-
sition of transitory resentment ? In short, they conquered
by persevering, claimed the right of dictating upon every
work of taste, sentiment, or genius, and, at last, when des-
titute of other employment, like the supernumerary domes-
tics of the great, made work for each other.
They now took upon them to teach poetry to those who
wanted genius ; and the power of disputing, to those who
knew nothing of the subject in debate. It was observed
how some of the most admired poets had copied nature.
From these they collected dry rules, dignified with long
names, and such were obtruded upon the public for their
improvement. Common sense would be apt to suggest,
that the art might be studied to more advantage, rather by
imitation than precept. It might suggest that those rules
were collected, not from nature, but a copy of nature, and
would consequently give us still fainter resemblances of
original beauty. It might still suggest, that explained wit
makes but a feeble impression; that the observations of
others are soon forgotten, those made by ourselves are per-
1 The first edition has " labour."—ED.
2 Vide Sueton. Hist. Gram.—PERCT.
3 The first edition has " crammed."—ED.
<pb>
manent and useful. But, it seems, understandings of every
size were to be mechanically instructed in poetry. If the
reader was too dull to relish the beauties of Virgil, the
comment of Servius was ready to brighten his imagination;
if Terence could not raise him to a smile, Evantius was
at hand, with a long-winded scholium, to increase his
titillation. Such rules are calculated to make blockheads
talk, but all the lemmata of the Lyceum are unable to give
him feeling.1
But it would be endless to recount all the absurdities2
which were hatched in the schools of those specious idlers;
be it sufficient to say, that they increased as learning im-
proved, but swarmed on its decline. It was then that every
work of taste was buried in long comments, every useful
subject in morals was distinguished away into casuistry,
and doubt and subtlety characterized the learning of the
age. Metrodoms, Valerius Probus, Aulus Gellius, Pedianus,
Boethius, and a hundred others, to be acquainted with
whom might show much reading, and but little judgment;
these, I say, made choice each of an author, and delivered
all their load of learning on his back. Shame to our an-
cestors ! many of their works have reached our times entire,
while Tacitus himself has suffered mutilation.
In a word, the commonwealth of literature was at last
wholly overrun by these studious triflers. Men of real
genius were lost in the multitude, or, as in a world of fools
it were folly to aim at being an only exception, obliged to
conform to every prevailing absurdity of the times. Original
productions seldom appeared, and learning, as if grown
superannuated, bestowed all its panegyric upon the vigour
of its youth, and turned encomiast upon its former achieve-
ments.
1 " Their logical disputations seemed even to be the apotheosis of
folly. In these the opponent had a right to affirm whatever absurdity
he thought proper. The defendant, though he saw the falsehood almost
by intuition, was not allowed to use his reason, but his art, in the debate.
It was his business only to measure the assertion by one of his artificial
instruments, and as it happened to accord or disagree, he found himself
qualified to support, or obliged to discontinue, his defence; which
seldom, however, happened, till fatigue or anger terminated the enquiry."
—First edit.
8 "Insect-like absurdities."—First edit.
<pb>
It is to these, then, that the depravation of ancient
polite learning is principally to be ascribed. By them it
was separated from common sense, and made the proper
employment of speculative idlers. Men bred up among
books, and seeing nature only by reflection, could do little,
except hunt after perplexity and confusion. The public,
therefore, with reason rejected learning, when thus ren-
dered barren, though voluminous; for we may be assured,
that the generality of mankind never lose a passion for
letters, while they continue to be either amusing or
useful.
It was such writers as these, that rendered learning unfit
for uniting and strengthening civil society, or for pro-
moting the views of ambition. True philosophy had kept
the Grecian states cemented into one effective body, more
than any law for that purpose; and the Etrurian philo-
sophy, which prevailed in the first ages of Rome, inspired
those patriot virtues which paved the way to universal
empire. But by the labours of commentators, when philo-
sophy became abstruse, or triflingly minute—when doubt
was presented instead of knowledge—when the orator was
taught to charm the multitude with the music of his
periods, and pronounced a declamation that might be sung
as well as spoken, and often upon subjects wholly fictitious,
—in such circumstances, learning was entirely unsuited to
all the purposes of government, or the designs of the am-
bitious. As long as the sciences could influence the state,
and its politics were strengthened by them, so long did the
community give them countenance and protection. But
the wiser part of mankind would not be imposed upon by
unintelligible jargon, nor, like the knight in Pantagruel,
swallow a chimera for a breakfast, though even cooked by
Aristotle. As the philosopher grew useless in the state, he
also became contemptible. In the times of Lucian he was
chiefly remarkable for his avarice, his impudence, and his
beard.
Under the auspicious influence of genius, arts and
sciences grew up together, and mutually illustrated each
other. But when once pedants became lawgivers, the
sciences began to want grace, and the polite arts solidity;
these grew crabbed and sour, those meretricious and
<pb>
gaudy ; the philosopher became disgustingly precise, and
the poet, ever straining after grace, caught only finery.
These men also contributed to obstruct the progress of
wisdom, by addicting their readers to one particular sect,
or some favourite science. They generally carried on a
petty traffic in some little creek : within that they busily
plied about, and drove an insignificant trade; but never
ventured out into the great ocean of knowledge, nor went
beyond the bounds that chance, conceit, or laziness, had
first prescribed their enquiries. Their disciples, instead of
aiming at being originals themselves, became imitators of
that merit alone which was constantly proposed for their
admiration. In exercises of this kind, the most stupid are
generally most successful; for there is not in nature a more
imitative animal than a dunce.
From hence ancient learning may be distinguished into
three periods. Its commencement, or the age of poets ;
its maturity, or the age of philosophers ; and its decline,
or the age of critics. In the poetical age, commentators
were very few, but might have in some respects been
useful. In its philosophical, their assistance must neces-
sarily become obnoxious; yet, as if the nearer we ap-
proached perfection, the more we stood in need of their
directions, in this period they began to grow numerous.
But when polite learning was no more, then it was those
literary lawgivers made the most formidable appearance.
Corruptissima republica, plurimce leges.—TACIT.'
2 But let us take a more distinct view of those ages of
ignorance in which false refinement had involved mankind,
and see how far they resemble our own.2
1 This is Goldsmith's text in several of his essays, as in the essay
' On English Liberty,' ' Citizen,' Letter L., and that on ' Custom and
Laws Compared,'' Bee/ No. VII.—ED.
2-2 Not in the first edition. The fact of its being inserted in the
second shows, to some extent, that the author in 1773 or 1774 abided
by his opinions expressed in 1759.—ED.
<pb>
CHAPTER HI.
A VIEW OF THE OBSCURE AGES.
WHATEVER the skill of any country may be in sciences,
it is from its excellence in polite learning alone, that it
must expect a character from posterity. The poet and
the historian are they who diffuse a lustre upon the age,
and the philosopher scarce acquires any applause, unless his
character be introduced to the vulgar by their mediation.
The obscure ages, which succeeded the decline of the
Roman empire, are a striking instance of the truth of this
assertion. Whatever period of those ill-fated times we
happen to turn to, we shall perceive more skill in the
sciences among the professors of them, more abstruse and
deeper enquiry into every philosophical subject, and a
greater show of subtlety and close reasoning, than in the
most enlightened ages of all antiquity. But their writings
were mere speculative amusements, and all their researches
exhausted upon trifles. Unskilled in the arts of adorning
their knowledge, or adapting it to common sense, their
voluminous productions rest peacefully in our libraries, or,
at best, are enquired after from motives of curiosity, not
by the scholar, but the virtuoso.
I am not insensible, that several late French historians
have exhibited the obscure ages in a very different light.
They have represented them as utterly ignorant both of
arts and sciences, buried in the profoundest darkness, or
only illuminated with a feeble gleam, which, like an ex-
piring taper, rose and sunk by intervals. Such assertions,
however, though they serve to help out the declaimer,
should be cautiously admitted by the historian. For in-
stance, the tenth century is particularly distinguished by
posterity with the appellation of obscure. Yet even in
this, the reader's memory may possibly suggest the names
of some, whose works, still preserved, discover a most ex-
tensive erudition, though rendered almost useless by affec-
tation and obscurity. A few of their names and writings
may be mentioned, which will serve at once to confirm
<pb>
what I assort, and give the reader an idea of what kind of
learning an age declining into obscurity chiefly chooses to
cultivate.
About the tenth century flourished Leo the philosopher.
We have seven volumes folio of his collections of laws,
published at Paris, 1647. He wrote upon the art military,
and understood also astronomy, and judicial astrology. He
was seven times more voluminous than Plato.
Solomon, the German, wrote a most elegant dictionary
of the Latin tongue, still preserved in the university of Lou-
vain; Pantaleon, in the lives of his illustrious country-
men, speaks of it in the warmest strains of rapture.
Dictionary writing was at that time much in fashion.
Constantino Porphyrogeneta [was] ' a man universally
skilled in the sciences. His tracts on the administration
of an empire, on tactics, and on laws, were published some
years since at Leyden. His court—for he was emperor of
the East—was resorted to by the learned from all parts of
the world.
Luitprandus [was] a most voluminous historian, particu-
larly famous for the history of his own times.2 The compli-
ments paid him as a writer are said to exceed even his own
voluminous productions. I cannot pass over one of a later
date made him by a German divine: " Luitprandus nun-
quam Luitprando dissimilis."3
Alfric composed several grammars and dictionaries still
preserved among the curious.
Pope Sylvester the Second,4 wrote a treatise on the sphere,
on arithmetic, and geometry, published some years since at
Paris.
Michael Psellus lived in this age, whose books in the
1 Goldsmith's editions have not " was" here, and similarly in the
following paragraphs. Percy gives the word (without the brackets);
and Percy may be right, for it seems he had the MS. of this work when
he published his edition of 1801. Vide Percy Correspondence, Nichols'
Iiit. Illus., v. vii., pp. 778-9, &c.—ED.
2 " In this he shows himself a perfect matter of fact man ; but, like
some moderns, who only value themselves on the same qualification, he
was a most notorious fabulist."—First edit.
3 " In English, None but himself could be his parallel."—First edit.
4 Goldsmith's editions have Sylvester " the eleventh." Percy corrected
this.—ED.
<pb>
sciences, I will not scruple to assert, contain more learning
than those of any one of the earlier ages. His erudition
was indeed amazing; and he was as voluminous as he was
learned. The character given him by Allatius has, perhaps,
more truth in it than will be granted by those who have
seen none of his productions. There was, says he, no
science with which he was unacquainted, none which he
did not write something upon, and none which he did not
leave better than he found it. To mention his works would
be endless. His commentaries on Aristotle alone amount
to three folios.
Bertholdus Teutonicus [was] a very voluminous historian.
He was a politician, and wrote against the government
under which he lived; but most of his writings, though not
all, are lost.
Constantinus Afer [was] a philosopher and physician.
We have remaining but two volumes folio of his philo-
logical performances. However, the historian who prefixes
the life of the author to his works, says, that he wrote
many more, as he kept on writing during the course of a
long life.1
Lambertus published a universal history about this time,
which has been printed at Frankfort in folio. A universal
history in one folio ! If he had consulted with his book-
seller, he would have spun it out to ten at least; but Lam-
bertus might have had too much modesty.2
By this time the reader perceives the spirit of learning
which at that time prevailed. The ignorance of the age
was not owing to a dislike of knowledge, but a false stan-
dard of taste was erected, and a wrong direction given to
philosophical enquiry. It was the fashion of the day3 to
write dictionaries, commentaries, and compilations,3 and to
evaporate in a folio the spirit that could scarce have sufficed
for an epigram. The most barbarous times had men of
1 " And when he had thus compiled more than any man that ever
went before him, he fell asleep: In domino obdormivit."—First edit.
1 The first edition has another paragraph, thus:—"Olympiodorus
published commentaries upon Plato. Doctor Foster, in his late edition of
the select dialogues of that philosopher, has often taken occasion to quote
him, and mentions him with honour."—ED.
3-3 " To consult books, not nature, and to," &c.—First edit.
<pb>
learning, if commentators, compilers, polemic divines, and
intricate metaphysicians deserved the title.
I have mentioned but a very inconsiderable number of
the writers in this age of obscurity. The multiplicity of
their publications will at least equal those of any similar
period of the most polite antiquity. As, therefore, the
writers of those times are almost entirely forgotten, we
may infer, that the number of publications alone will never
secure any age whatsoever from oblivion. Nor can print-
ing, contrary to what Mr. Baumelle1 has remarked, prevent
literary decline for the future, since it only increases the
number of books without advancing their intrinsic merit.2
CHAPTEE IV.3
OF THE PRESENT STATE OF POLITE LEARNING IN ITALY.
FROM ancient, we are now come to modern times, and,
in running over Europe, we shall find, that wherever learn-
ing has been cultivated, it has flourished by the same
advantages as in Greece and Rome; and that, wherever it
has declined, it sinks by the same causes of decay.4
Dante, the poet of Italy, who wrote in the thirteenth
century, was the first who attempted to bring learning from
the cloister into the community, and paint human nature
in a language adapted to modern manners. He addressed
a barbarous people in a method suited to their apprehen-
1 M. L. A. De La Beaumelle, a witty French writer and critic of
Voltaire. See his ' Mes Pensees, ou Le Qu'en dira-t-on,' 1751. Gold-
smith had an article on the English translation of this writer's' Memoirs
for the History of Madame De Maintenon' in the Monthly Review of
1757 : see the Criticisms in our vol. iv.—ED.
2 Here followed as " chapter iv" in the first edition, " A Parallel Be-
tween the Rise and Decline of Ancient and Modern Learning," which
chapter will be found in our Appendix, p. 529.—ED.
3 Chapter V. in the first edition, consequent upon the arrangement
mentioned in the last note.—ED.
4 This paragraph is not in the first edition. See note 2-2, ante, p. 475.
—ED.
-"-
<pb>
sions ; united purgatory and the river Styx, St. Peter and
Virgil, heaven and hell, together, and shows a strange mix-
ture of good sense and absurdity. The truth is, he owes
most of his reputation to the obscurity of the times in
which he lived. As in the land of Benin a man may pass
for a prodigy of parts who can read, so in an age of barba-
rity, a small degree of excellence ensures success.1 But it
was great merit in himl to have lifted up the standard of
nature, in spite of all the opposition and the persecution
he received from contemporary criticism. To this standard
every succeeding genius resorted; the germ of every art
and science began to unfold; and to imitate nature was
found to be the surest way of imitating antiquity. In a
century or two after, modern Italy might justly boast of
rivalling ancient Rome ; equal in some branches of polite
learning, and not far surpassed in others.
They soon, however, fell from emulating the wonders of
antiquity into simple admiration. As if the word had been
given, when Vida and Tasso wrote on the arts of poetry,
the whole swarm of critics was up. The Spsronis of the
age attempted to be awkwardly merry; and the Virtuosi
and the Nascotti sat upon the merits of every contempo-
rary performance. After the age of Clement VII. the
Italians seemed to think that there was more merit in
praising or censuring well, than in writing well; almost
every subsequent performance since their time being de-
signed rather to show the excellence of the critic's taste
than his genius.2 One or two poets, indeed, seem at present
born to redeem the honour of their country. Metastasio3
has restored nature in all her simplicity;4 and Maffei5 is
'-' " But it is his greatest merit, therefore," &c.—First edit.
2 " But while I describe Italy as thus fallen from her former excellence,
I cannot refrain the pleasure of mentioning one or two poets who seem,"
&c.—First edit.
3 Metastasio, 1698-1782. He wrote twenty-six operas, besides many
other works; and Dr. Burney wrote his life.—ED.
4 " No poet ever painted more conformably to truth, nor is there any
whose characters speak a more heart-felt passion. His language also, if
a foreigner may be allowed to determine, excells even that of Tasso, and
his scenery is infinitely superior. Maffei," &c.—First edit.
4 F. S. Maffei, 1675-1755. His' Merope ' was accounted a masterpiece
in tragedy.—ED.
<pb>
the first that has introduced a tragedy among his country-
men without a love plot. Perhaps the Samson of Milton,
and the Athalia of Racine, might have been his guides in
such an attempt.1 But two poets in an age are not sufficient
to revive the splendour of decaying genius ; nor should we
consider them as the standard by which to characterize a
nation. Our measures of literary reputation must be
taken rather from that numerous class of men, who, placed
above the vulgar, are yet beneath the great, and who
confer fame on others without receiving any portion of it
themselves.
In Italy, then, we shall no where find a stronger passion
for the arts of taste, yet no country making more feeble
efforts to promote either. The Virtuosi and Filosofi seem
to have divided the Encyclopaedia between each other.
Both inviolably attach'd to their respective pursuits, and,
from an opposition of character, each holding the other in
the most sovereign contempt. The Virtuosi, professed
critics of beauty in the works of art, judge of medals by the
smell, and pictures by feeling: in statuary, hang over a
fragment with the most ardent gaze of admiration: though
wanting the head and the other extremities, if dug from a
ruin, the Torso becomes inestimable. An unintelligible monu-
ment of Etruscan barbarity cannot be sufficiently prized;
and any thing from Herculaneum becomes rapturous.2
When the intellectual taste is thus decayed, its relishes
become false, and, like that of sense, nothing will satisfy
but what is best suited to feed the disease.3
Poetry is no longer among them an imitation of what we
see, but of what a visionary might wish. The zephyr
breathes the most exquisite perfume, the trees wear eternal
verdure; fauns, and dryads, and hamadryads, stand ready
to fan the sultry shepherdess, who has forgot, indeed, the
prettinesses with which Guarini's4 shepherdesses have been
reproached, but is so simple and innocent as often to have
no meaning. Happy country, where the pastoral age
1 Yet he seems as much superior to either as a poet, as the subject of
his Merope is more happily chosen."—First edit.
8 Percy edition has " excites rapture."—ED.
3 The first edition has "palliateor feed," &c.—ED.
4 For " Guarini's," " former Italian shepherdesses," &c.—First edit.
III. I I
<pb>
begins to revive !—where the wits even of Borne, are united
into a rural group of nymphs and swains, under the appel-
lation of modern Arcadians!—where, in the midst of
porticos, processions, and cavalcades, abbe's turned shep-
herds,1 and shepherdesses without sheep, indulge their
innocent divertimenti !2
The Filosofi are entirely different from the former. As
those pretend to have got their knowledge from conversing
with the living and polite, so these boast of having theirs
from books and study. Bred up all their lives in colleges,
they have there learned to think in track, servilely to
follow the leader of their sect, and only to adopt such
opinions as their universities, or the inquisition, are pleased
to allow. By these means, they are behind the rest of
Europe in several modern improvements. Afraid to think
for themselves; and their universities seldom admit
opinions as true, till universally received among the rest
of mankind.3 In short, were I to personize my ideas of
learning in this country, I would represent it in the tawdry
habits of the stage, or else in the more homely guise of
bearded school-philosophy.
1 See an account of this academy in the Monthly Review, vol. xviii.,
p. 249, in a criticism on M. de la Baume Desdossat's ' L'Arcadie Moderne,
ou les Bergeries Savantes, Pastorale Heroique,' etc.—B.
1 " Perhaps, while I am writing, a shepherdess of threescore is listen-
ing to the pastoral tale of a French abW: a warm imagination might
paint her in all the splendour of ripened beauty, reclining on a pasteboard
rock ; might fancy her lover, with looks inexpressibly tender, ravishing
a kiss from the snowy softness of one of her hands, while the other holds
a crook according to pastoral decorum. Amidst such frippery as this,
there was no place for friendless Metastasio; he has left Italy, and the
genius of nature seems to have left it with him."—First edit.
3 The first edition has not " their." Perhaps we should omit " and,"
and read " Afraid to think for themselves, their universities,1' &c.—ED.
<pb>
CHAPTER V.
OF POLITE LEARNING IN GERMANY.1
IF we examine the state of learning in Germany, we
shall find that the Germans early discovered a passion for
polite literature; but unhappily, like conquerors, who, in-
vading the dominions of others, leave their own to desola-
tion, instead of studying the German tongue, they continue
to write in Latin. Thus, while they cultivated an obsolete
language, and vainly laboured to apply it to modern
manners, they neglected their own.
At the same time also, they began at the wrong end, I
mean by being commentators; and though they have given
many instances of their industry, they have scarce afforded
any of genius. If criticism could have improved the taste
of a people, the Germans would have been the most polite
nation alive. We shall nowhere behold the learned wear a
more important appearance than here; nowhere more dig-
nified with professorships, or dressed out in the fopperies
of scholastic finery. However, they seem to earn all the
honour of this kind which they enjoy. Their assiduity is
unparalleled, and did they" employ half those hours on
study which they bestow on reading, we might be induced
to pity as well as praise their painful pre-eminence. But
guilty of a fault too common to great readers, they write
through volumes, while they do not think through a page.
Never fatigued themselves, they think the reader can never
be weary ; so they drone on, saying all that can be said on
the subject, not selecting what may be advanced to the
purpose. Were angels to write books, they never would
write folios.3
1 In the first edition the matter of this chapter is but a continuation
of that of the preceding chapter.—ED.
> " Did the learned of this country," &c.—First edit.
3 " Miles Davies has given his opinion of the advantages of little books
with some wit and humour. ' A big book,' he says, ' is a scarecrow to
the head and pocket of the author, student, buyer, and seller, as well as
a harbour of ignorance; hence the inaccessible masteries of the inex-
pugnable ignorance and superstition of the ancient heathens, degenerate
<pb>
But let the Germans have their due : if they are dull, no
nation alive assumes a more laudable solemnity, or better
understands all the decorums of stupidity. Let the dis-
course of a professor run on never so heavily, it cannot
be irksome to his dozing pupils, who frequently lend him
sympathetic nods of approbation. I have sometimes at-
tended their disputes at gradation. On this occasion they
often dispense with their gravity, and seem really all alive.
The disputes are managed between the followers of Car-
tesius, whose exploded system they continue to call the
new philosophy, and those of Aristotle. Though both
parties are in the wrong, they argue with an obstinacy
worthy the cause of truth; Nego, Probo, and Distinguo,
grow loud; the disputants become warm, the moderator
cannot be heard, the audience take part in the debate, till
at last the whole hall buzzes withl sophistry and error.1
There are, it is true, several societies in this country,
which are chiefly calculated to promote" knowledge. 3 His
late majesty, as elector of Hanover,3 has established one at
Gottingen, at an expense of not less than a hundred thou-
sand pounds. This university has already pickled monsters,
and dissected live puppies without number. Their trans-
actions have been published in the learned world, at proper
intervals, since their institution, and will, it is hoped, one
day give them just reputation, But kad the fourth part
of the immense sum above-mentioned been given in proper
rewards to genius, in some neighbouring countries, it would
have rendered the name of the donor immortal, and added
to the real interests of society.
4 Yet it ought to be observed, that, of late, learning has
been patronized here by a prince, who, in the humblest
station, would have been the first of mankind.4 The society
Jews, and of the popish scholasters and canonists entrenched under the
frightful bulk of huge, vast, and innumerable volumes; such as the great
folio that the Jewish rabbins fancied in a dream was given by the angel
Raziel to his pupil Adam, containing all the celestial sciences, &c.'"—
DlsKA-ELi: ' Curiosities of Literature,' first series, edit. 1841, p. 126.
i.1 " Erroneous philosophy."—First edit.
2 " Natural knowledge."—First edit.
3-» " The Elector of Hanover."—First edit.
*-• " But let me cease from censure, since I have here so fine an oppor-
tunity of praise. Even in the midst of Germany, true learning has
<pb>
established by the King of Prussia at Berlin, is one of the
finest literary institutions that any age or nation has pro-
duced. This academy comprehends all the sciences under
four different classes ; and although the object of each is
different, and admits of being separately treated, yet these
classes mutually influence the progress of each other, and
concur in the same general design. Experimental philo-
sophy, mathematics, metaphysics, and polite literature,
are here carried on together.1 The members are not col-
lected from among the students of some obscure seminary,
or the wits of a metropolis, but chosen from all the literati
of Europe, supported by the bounty, and ornamented by
the productions, of their royal founder. We can easily dis-
cern, how much such an institution excels any other now
subsisting. One fundamental error among societies of this
kind, is their addicting themselves to one branch of science,
or some particular part of polite learning. Thus, in Ger-
many, there are nowhere so many establishments of this
nature; but as they generally profess the promotion of
natural or medical knowledge, he who reads their Acta will
only find an obscure farago of experiment, most frequently
terminated by no resulting phenomena. To make experi-
ments, is, I own, the only way to promote natural knowledge;
but to treasure up every unsuccessful enquiry into nature, or
to communicate every experiment without conclusion, is not
to promote science,2 but to oppress it. Had the members of
these societies enlarged their plans, and taken in art as well
as science, one part of knowledge would have repressed
any faulty luxuriance in the other, and all would have
materially assisted each other's promotion. Besides, the
society, which, with a contempt of all collateral assistance,
admits of members skilled in one science only, whatever
their diligence or labour may be, will lose much time in the
discovery of such truths as are well known already to the
learned in a different line ; consequently, their progress
found an asylum, and taste and genius have been patronized by a prince,
who," &c.—First edit.
1 " And mutually illustrate, and strengthen, and adorn each other."
—First edit.
2 " But confuse it; not to lift learning from obscurity, but with addi-
tional weight to oppress it."—First edit.
<pb>
/
must be slow in gaining a proper eminence from which to
view their subject, and their strength will be exhausted in
attaining the station whence they should have set out.
With regard to the Royal Society of London, the greatest,
and perhaps the oldest institution of the kind, had it
widened the basis of its institution, though they might not
have propagated more discoveries, they would probably
have delivered them in a more pleasing and compendious
form. They would have been free from the contempt of
the ill-natured, and the raillery of the wit,1 for which, even
candour must allow, there is but too much foundation.
But the Berlin academy is subject to none of all these2 in-
conveniences, but every one of its individuals is in a
capacity of deriving more from the common stock than he
contributes to it, while each academician serves as a check
upon the rest of his fellows.
Yet, very probably, even this fine institution will soon
decay. As it rose, so it will decline with its great en-
courager. The society, if I may so speak, is artificially
supported. The introduction of foreigners of learning was
right; but in adopting a foreign language also, I mean the
French, in which all the transactions are to be published,
and questions debated, in this there was an error. As I
have already hinted, the language of the natives of every
country should be also the language of its polite learning.
To figure in polite learning, every country should make
their own language from their own manners ; nor will they
ever succeed by introducing that of another, which has
been formed from manners which are different. Besides,
any academy composed of foreigners must still be recruited
from abroad, unless all the natives of the country to which
it belongs, are in a capacity of becoming candidates for its
honours or rewards. While France, therefore, continues
to supply Berlin, polite learning will flourish; but when
royal favour is withdrawn, learning will return to its natural
country.
1 Such as the poet Butler's ' Elephant in the Moon,' and many simi-
lar satires levelled at the Royal Society in its earlier days.—ED.
1 " All these " is the Percy reading. The second edition has " all
the," and the first has " none of the above."—ED.
<pb>
CHAPTER VI.1
OF POLITE LEARNING IN HOLLAND AND SOME OTHER
COUNTRIES OF EUROPE.
HOLLAND, at first view, appears to have some pretensions
to polite learning. It may be regarded as the great empo-
rium, not less of literature than of every other commodity.
Here, though destitute of what may be properly called a
language of their own, all the languages are understood,
cultivated, and spoken. All useful inventions in arts, and
new discoveries in science, are published here almost as
soon as at the places which first produced them. Its indi-
viduals have the same faults, however, with the Germans
of making more use of their memory than their judgment.
The chief employment of their literati is to criticize, or
answer the new performances which appear elsewhere.
A dearth of wit in France or England naturally produces
a scarcity in Holland. What Ovid says of Echo may be
applied here: " Nee loqui prius ipsa didicit nee reticere
loquenti."" They wait till something new comes out from
others; examine its merits, and reject it, or make it rever-
berate through the rest of Europe.
After all, I know not whether they should be allowed
any national character for polite learning. All their taste
is derived to them from neighbouring nations, and that in
a language not their own. They somewhat resemble their
brokers, who trade for immense sums without having any
capital.
The other countries of Europe may be considered as
immersed in ignorance, or making but feeble efforts to rise.
Spain has long fallen from amazing Europe with her wit, to
amusing them with the greatness of her catholic credulity.
Rome considers her as the most favourite of all her children,
' This, like the last chapter, is a continuation of chap. v. in the first
edition.—ED.
- Metam. iii. 357, probably :—
" nee reticere loquenti,
Nee prior ipsa loqui didicit, resonabilis Echo."
—Bo.
<pb>
and school divinity still reigns there in triumph. In spite
of all attempts of the Marquis D'Ensenada, who saw with
regret the barbarity of his countrymen, and bravely offered
to oppose it by introducing new systems of learning, and
suppressing the seminaries of monastic ignorance—in spite
of the ingenuity of Padre Feyjoo, whose book of vulgar
errors so finely exposes the monkish stupidity of the
times,—the religious have prevailed. Ensenada has been
banished, and now lives in exile. Feyjoo has incurred the
hatred and contempt of every bigot whose errors he has
attempted to oppose, and feels, no doubt, the unremitting
displeasure of the priesthood. Persecution is a tribute the
great must ever pay for pre-eminence.1
It is a little extraordinary, however, how Spain, whose
genius is naturally fine, should be so much behind the rest
of Europe in this particular; or why school divinity should
hold its ground there for near six hundred years. The
reason must be, that philosophical opinions, which are
otherwise transient, acquire stability in proportion as they
are connected with the laws of the country; and philosophy
and law2 have no where been so closely united as here.
Sweden has of late made some attempts in polite learn-
ing in its own language. Count Tessin's instructions to
the prince, his pupil, are no bad beginning. If the Muses
can fix their residence so far northward, perhaps no country-
bids so fair for their reception. They have, I am told, a
language rude but energetic; if so, it will bear a polish.
They have also a jealous sense of liberty, and that strength
of thinking peculiar to northern climates, without its
attendant ferocity. They will certainly in time produce
somewhat great, if their intestine divisions do not unhappily
prevent them.
The history of polite learning in Denmark may be com-
prised in the life of one single man: it rose and fell with
the late famous Baron Holberg. This was, perhaps, one of
the most extraordinary personages that has done honour to
the present century. His being the son of a private sentinel
1 Father Feyjoo, or Freijo, was a Spanish essayist; b. 1701; d.
1764. Goldsmith gives a further account of him in No. 3 of The Bee ;
see vol. ii. p. 360.—ED.
2 " Philosophy and religion."—First edit. —
<pb>
did not abate the ardour of his ambition, for he learned to
read though without a master. Upon the death of his
father, being left entirely destitute, he was involved in all
that distress which is common among 'the poor, and of
which the great have scarce any idea. However, though
only a boy of nine years old, he still persisted in pursuing
his studies, travelled about from school to school, and
begged his learning and his bread. When at the age of
seventeen, instead of applying himself to any of the lower
occupations, which seem best adapted to such circum-
stances, he was resolved to travel for improvement from
Norway, the place of his birth, to Copenhagen, the capital
city of Denmark. He lived there by teaching French, at
the same time avoiding no opportunity of improvement
that his scanty funds could permit. But his ambition was
not to be restrained, or his thirst of knowledge satisfied,
until he had seen the world. Without money, recommen-
dations, or friends, he undertook to set out upon his travels,
and make the tour of Europe on foot. A good voice, and
a trifling skill in music, were the only finances he had to
support an undertaking so extensive; so he travelled by
day, and at night sung at the doors of peasants' houses to
get himself a lodging. In this manner, while yet very
young, Holberg passed through France, Germany, and
Holland; and coming over to England, took up his re-
sidence for two years in the university of Oxford. Here
he subsisted by teaching French and music, and wrote his
universal history, his earliest, but worst performance.
Furnished with all the learning of Europe, he at last
thought proper to return to Copenhagen, where his in-
genious productions quickly gained him that favour he de-
served. He composed not less than eighteen comedies.
Those in his own language are said to excel, and those
which are translated into French have peculiar merit. He
was honoured with nobility, and enriched by the bounty of
the king; so that a life begun in contempt and penury,
ended in opulence and esteem.1
1 Holberg was born in 1684, and died in 1754 at Leyden, while Gold-
smith was there. He is supposed to have been Goldsmith's exemplar in
his extraordinary wanderings through France, &c. See ' Life,' p. 12.
—ED.
<pb>
Thus we see in what a low state polite learning is in the
countries I have mentioned,—' either past its prime, or not
yet arrived at maturity.1 And though the sketch I have
drawn be general, yet it was for the most part taken upon
the spot.2 I am sensible, however, of the impropriety of
national reflection: and did not truth bias me more than
inclination in this particular, I should, instead of the ac-
count already given, have presented the reader with a pane-
gyric on many of the individuals of every country, whose
merits deserve the warmest strains of praise. Apostol
Zeno,3 Algarotti, Goldoni,3 Muratori, and Stay, in Italy—
Haller, Klopstock, and Rabner, in Germany—Musschen-
broeck, and Gaubius,4 in Holland,—all deserve the highest
applause. 3 Men like these, while the great and the avari-
cious of this world are contriving means to aggravate
national hatred, and, perhaps, fonder of satisfying vanity
than justice, are willing to make the world uneasy, because
themselves are so, continue ever the friends of man. Men
like these, united by one bond,5 pursuing one design, spend
their labour and their lives in making their fellow-creatures
happy, and in repairing the breaches caused by ambition.
In this light, the meanest philosopher, though all his pos-
sessions are his lamp or his cell, is more truly valuable than
he whose name echoes to the shout of the million, and who
stands in all the glare of admiration. In this light, though
poverty and contemptuous neglect are all the wages of his
good will from mankind, yet the rectitude of his intention
"-1 Not in the first edition.—ED.
8 An allusion to the author's travels on the continent, 1754-56. " Nor
are the assertions hazarded at random " is added here in the first edition.
—Ec.
3-3 Not in the first edition.—ED.
4 It was under him that Goldsmith studied chemistry.—B. [See
Letters, p. 429; and ' Life,' p. 11.—ED.]
5-! " Bat it was my design, rather to give an idea of the spirit of learn-
ing in those countries, than a dry catalogue of author's names and
writings. But, let me cease a moment from considering this worthy,
however erroneous, part of mankind, on that side alone in which they
are exposed to censure, and survey them as the friends of man. While
the great and the avaricious of this world are contriving means to aggra-
vate national hatred; and, perhaps, fonder of satisfying vanity than
justice, are willing to make the world uneasy, because themselves are so;
these harmless instruments of peace united," &c.—First edit.
<pb>
is an ample recompense ; and self-applause for the present,
and the alluring prospect of fame for futurity, reward his
labours. The perspective of life brightens upon us, when
terminated by an object so charming. Every intermediate
image of want, banishment, or sorrow, receives a lustre
from its distant influence. With this in view, the patriot,
philosopher, and poet, have often looked with calmness on
disgrace and famine, and rested on their straw with cheerful
serenity. Even the last terrors of departing nature abate
of their severity, and look kindly on him who considers his
sufferings as a passport to immortality, and lays his sorrows
on the bed of fame.1
CHAPTER VII. [AND VIII.2]
OF POLITE LEARNING IN FRANCE.
8 WE have hitherto seen, that wherever the poet was per-
mitted to begin by improving his native language, polite
learning flourished; but where the critic undertook the
same task, it has never risen to any degree of perfection.3
Let us now examine the merits of modern learning in
France and England ; where, though it may be on the de-
cline, yet it is still capable of retrieving much of its former
splend'our. In other places learning has not yet been
planted, or has suffered a total decay. To attempt amend-
ment there,4 would be only like the application of remedies
to an insensible or a mortified part; but here there is still
1 Here follow chapters vi. and vii. in the first edition, with the head-
ings respectively—" A parallel between the decline of ancient and
modern learning," and " The polite learning of England and France
incapable of comparison." Chapter vi. reappears in chapter xi. of the
second edition, and chapter vii. will be found in our Appendix, p. 530.
—ED.
3 In the second edition this chapter is counted as vii. and viii., the
following chapters being numbered ix. and so on. Some later editors
have numbered this chapter vii., and hence have had to re-number all
the following chapters.—ED.
3-3 Not in the first edition. The following lines, to " there is hope,"
come at the end of chap. vi. in the first edition.—ED.
4 For " there " the first edition has " of Italy or Germany."—ED.
<pb>
life, and there is hope.1 And indeed the French themselves
are so far from giving in to any despondence of this kind,
that, on the contrary, they admire the progress they are
daily making in every science.1 That levity, for which we
are apt to despise this nation, is probably the principal
source of their happiness. An agreeable oblivion of past
pleasures, a freedom from solicitude about future ones,
and a poignant zest of every present enjoyment, if they be
not philosophy, are at least excellent substitutes. By this
they are taught to regard the period in which they live with
admiration. The present manners, and the present con-
versation, surpass all that preceded.2 A similar enthusiasm
as strongly tinctures their learning and their taste. While
we, with a despondence characteristic of our nature, are for
removing back British excellence to the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, our more happy rivals of the Continent cry up
the writers of the present times with rapture, and regard
the age of Louis XV. as the true Augustan age of France.
The truth is, their present writers have not fallen so far
short of the merits of their ancestors as ours have done.
That self-sufficiency now mentioned, may have been of
service to them in this particular. By fancying themselves
superior to their ancestors, they have been encouraged to
enter the lists with confidence; and by not being dazzled
at the splendour of another's reputation, have sometimes
had sagacity to mark out an unbeaten path to fame for
themselves.
Other causes also may be assigned, that their second
growth of genius is still more vigorous than ours. Their
encouragements to merit are more skilfully directed; the
link of patronage and learning still continues unbroken.
The French nobility have certainly a most pleasing way of
satisfying the vanity of an author, without indulging his
avarice. A man of literary merit is sure of being caressed
by the great, though seldom enriched. His pension from
the crown just supplies half a competence, and the sale of
his labours makes some small addition to his circumstances.
Thus the author leads a life of splendid poverty, and seldom
'-1 Not in the first edition.
2 " A Frenchman is as little displeased with every thing about him,
as he is with his own person or existence."—First edit.
<pb>
becomes wealthy or indolent enough to discontinue an exer-
tion of those abilities by which he rose. With the English
it is different. Our writers of rising merit are generally
neglected, while the few of an established reputation are
overpaid by luxurious affluence. The young encounter
every hardship which generally attends upon aspiring in-
digence ; the old enjoy the vulgar, and perhaps the more
prudent satisfaction, of putting riches in competition with
fame. Those are often seen to spend their youth in want
and obscurity ; these are sometimes found to lead an old
age of indolence and avarice. But such treatment must
naturally be expected from Englishmen, whose national
character it is to be slow and cautious in making friends,
but violent in friendships once contracted. The English
nobility, in short, are often known to give greater rewards
to genius than the French, who, however, are much more
judicious in the application of their empty favours.
The fair sex in France have also not a little contributed
to prevent the decline of taste and literature, by expecting
such qualifications in their admirers. A man of fashion at
Paris, however contemptible we may think him here, must
be acquainted with the reigning modes of philosophy as
well as of dress, to be able to entertain his mistress
agreeably. The sprightly pedants are not to be caught by
dumb show,1 by the squeeze of the hand, or the ogling of a
broad eye; but must be pursued at once through all the
labyrinths of the Newtonian system, or the metaphysics of
Locke.2 I have seen as bright a circle of beauty at the
chemical lectures of Rouelle3 as gracing the court of Ver-
sailles. And indeed wisdom never appears so charming,
as when graced and protected by beauty.
To these advantages may be added the reception of their
language in the different courts of Europe. An author
who excels is sure of having all the polite for admirers,
and is encouraged to write, by the pleasing expectation of
universal fame. Add to this, that those countries who
1 " The charming pedants are not to be caught, like some damsels to
be seen in Holland, by dumb show, by a squeeze," &c.—First edit.
2 " And still more the variations of the female inclination."—First
edit.
3 Gr. F. Eouelle, 1703-1770.—ED.
<pb>
can make nothing good from their own language, have
lately begun to write in this, some of whose productions
contribute to support the present literary reputation of
France.1
There are, therefore, many among the French who do
honour to the present age, and whose writings will be
transmitted to posterity with an ample share of fame.
Some of the most celebrated are as follow:—
Voltaire, whose voluminous yet spirited productions
are too well known to require an elogy. Does he not
resemble the champion mentioned by Xenophon, of great
reputation in all the gymnastic exercises united, but in-
ferior to each champion singly, who excels only in one ?
Montesquieu, a name equally deserving fame with the
former. The Spirit of Laws is an instance how much
genius is able to lead learning. His system has been
adopted by the literati; and yet, is it not possible for
opinions equally plausible to be formed upon opposite
principles, if a genius like his could be found to attempt
such an undertaking?2 He seems more a poet than a
philosopher.
Rousseau, of Geneva, a professed man-hater, or, more
properly speaking, a philosopher enraged with one half of
mankind, because they unavoidably make the other half
unhappy. Such sentiments are generally the result of
much good-nature and little experience.
Piron, an author possessed of as much wit as any man
alive, yet with as little prudence to turn it to his own
advantage. A comedy of his, called La Metromanie, is the
best theatrical production that has appeared of late in
Europe. But I know not whether I should most commend
his genius or censure his obscenity. His ode a Priape, has
justly excluded him from a place in the academy of Belles
Lettres. However, the good-natured Montesquieu, by his
1 " The age of Louis the XIVth, notwithstanding these advantages, is
still superior. It is, indeed, a misfortune for a fine writer to be born in
a period so enlightened as ours. The harvest of wit is gathered in, and
little is left for him, except to glean what others have thought unworthy
their bringing away. Yet there are, therefore," &c.—First edit.
2 M. Linguet, a writer of some talent [1736-1794], has in fact attempted
this in his ' Theory of Civil Laws,' but not very successfully.—B.
<pb>
interest, procured the starving bard a trifling pension. His
own epitaph was all the revenge he took upon the academy
for being repulsed.
Cy-git Piron, qui ne fut jamais rien,
Fas memo Academician.*
Crebillon, junior, a writer of real merit, but guilty of the
same indelicate faults with the former. Wit employed in
dressing up obscenity, is like the art used in painting a
corpse ; it may be thus rendered tolerable to one sense, but
fails not quickly to offend some other.
Gresset [is]2 agreeable and easy. His comedy called the
Mechant, and a humorous poem entitled Ver-Vert, have
original merit. He was bred a Jesuit; but his wit procured
his dismission from the society. This last work particu-
larly could expect no pardon from the convent, being a
satire against nunneries!
D'Alembert has united an extensive skill in scientifical
learning with the most refined taste for the polite arts.
His excellence in both has procured him a seat in each
academy.
Diderot [is] an elegant writer and subtile reasoner. He
is the supposed author of the famous Thesis which the
Abbe" Prade sustained before the doctors of the Sorbonne.
It was levelled against Christianity, and the Sorbonne too
hastily gave it their sanction. They perceived its purport,
however, when it was too late. The college was brought
into some contempt, and the Abbe" obliged to take refuge
at the court of Berlin.
The Marquis D'Argens attempts to add the character of
a philosopher to the vices of a debauchee.
The catalogue might be increased with several other
authors of merit, such as Marivaux, Le Franc, Saint Foix,
Destouches, and Modonville ; but let it suffice to say, that
by these the character of the present age is tolerably sup-
ported. Though their poets seldom rise to fine enthu-
siasm, they never sink into absurdity; though they fail
1 Alexis Piron, b. 1689 ; d. 1773. A further account of him will be-
found in our author's ' Memoirs of Voltaire,' vol. iv., p. 23.—ED.
2 Percy inserted " is " here, and also in the next paragraph but one..
—ED.
<pb>
to astonish, they are generally possessed of talents to
please.
1 The age of Louis XTV., notwithstanding these respect-
able names, is still vastly superior. For, beside the general
tendency of critical corruption, which shall be spoken of
by and by, there are other symptoms which indicate a de-
cline.1 There is, for instance, a fondness for scepticism,
which runs through the works of some of their most ap-
plauded writers, and which the numerous class of their
imitators have contributed to diffuse. Nothing can be a
more certain sign that genius is in the wane, than its being
obliged to fly to paradox for support, and attempting to be
erroneously agreeable. A man who, with all the impotence
of wit, and all the eager desires of infidelity, writes against
the religion of his country, may raise doubts, but will
never give conviction; all he can do is to render society
less happy than he found it. It was a good manner which
the father of the late poet Saint Foix, took to reclaim his
son from this juvenile error. The young poet had shut
himself up for some time in his study; and his father,
willing to know what had engaged his attention so closely,
upon entering, found him busied in drawing up a new
system of religion, and endeavouring to show the absur-
dity of that already established. The old man knew by
experience, that it was useless to endeavour to convince a
vain young man by right reason, so only desired his com-
pany up stairs. When come into the father's apartment,
he takes his son by the hand, and, drawing back a curtain
at one end of the room, discovered a crucifix exquisitely
painted. " My son," says he, " you desire to change the
religion of your country,—behold the fate of a reformer! "2
The truth is, vanity is more apt to misguide men than
false reasoning. As some had rather be conspicuous in a
mob, than unnoticed even in privy-council, so others choose
rather to' be foremost in the retinue of error, than follow
1.1 " But although taste is still cultivated there with assiduity, I
must not conceal those symptoms which seem manifestly tending to pro-
mote its decline. There is, &c.—First edit.
2 The first edition has " Behold the fate of an innovator." In Gold-
smith's ' Memoirs of Voltaire' the same story, in almost the same words,
is told as of Voltaire and his father. See vol. iv., p. 12.—ED.
<pb>
in the train of truth.1 What influence the conduct of such
writers may have on the morals of a people, is not my
business here to determine. Certain I am, that it has a
manifest tendency to subvert the literary merits of the
country in view. The change of religion in every nation
has hitherto produced barbarism and ignorance; and such
will be probably its consequences in every future period.
For when the laws and the opinions of society are made to
clash, harmony is dissolved, and all the arts2 of peace una-
voidably crushed in the encounter.
The writers of this country have also of late fallen into
a method of considering every part of art and science as
arising from simple principles. The success of Montesquieu,
and one or two more, has induced all the subordinate ranks
of genius into vicious imitation. To this end they turn to
our view that side of the subject which contributes to sup-
port their hypothesis, while the objections are generally
passed over in silence. Thus an universal system rises
from a partial representation of the question; a whole is
concluded from a part; a book appears entirely new, and
the fancy-built fabric is styled for a short time very inge-
nious. In this manner, we have seen of late almost every
subject in morals, natural history, politics, economy, and
commerce treated. Subjects naturally proceeding on many
principles, and some even opposite to each other, are all
taught to proceed along the fine of systematic simplicity,
and continue, like other agreeable falsehoods, extremely
pleasing, till they are detected.
I must still add another fault, of a nature somewhat
similar to the former. As those above mentioned are for
contracting a single science into system, so those I am
going to speak of are for drawing up a system of all the
sciences united. Such undertakings as these are carried
on by different writers cemented into one body, and con-
curring in the same design, by the mediation of a book-
seller. From these inauspicious combinations proceed
those monsters of learning, the Trevoux, Encyclopedies,
1 " And prefer the applause of pert stupidity, to that approbation
which virtue ever pays itself."—First edit.
* In Goldsmith's edit ions the word is " arts 5" Percy, however, printed
" parts," and all the editors since have followed Percy.—ED.
III. K K
<pb>
and Bibliotheques of the age. In making these, men of
every rank in literature are employed, wits and dunces
contribute their share, and Diderot, as well as Desmaretz,
are candidates for oblivion. The genius of the first sup-
plies the gale of favour; and the latter adds the useful
ballast of stupidity. By such means, the enormous mass
heavily makes its way among the public, and, to borrow a
bookseller's phrase, the whole impression moves off. These
great collections of learning may serve to make us in-
wardly repine at our own ignorance; may serve, when gilt
and lettered, to adorn the lower shelves of a regular
library; but woe to the reader who, not daunted at the
immense distance between one great pasteboard and the
other, opens the volume, and explores his way through a
region so extensive, but barren of entertainment. No un-
expected landscape there to delight the imagination; no
diversity of prospect to cheat the painful journey. He sees
the wide extended desert lie before him ; what is past only
increases his terror of what is to come. His course is not
half finished ; he looks behind him with affright, and for-
ward with despair. Perseverance is at last overcome, and
a night of oblivion lends its friendly aid to terminate the
perplexity.
CHAPTER IX.
OF LEARNING IN GREAT BRITAIN.
To acquire a character for learning among the English, at
present, it is necessary to know much more than is either
important or useful.1 It seems the spirit of the times for
men here to' exhaust their natural sagacity in exploring the
intricacies of another man's thought, and thus never to have
leisure to think for themselves. Others have carried on
learning from that stage where the good sense of our
ancestors have thought it too minute, or too speculative,
'-' " The absurd passion of being deemed profound has done more in-
jury to all kinds of science than is generally imagined. Some thus ex-
haust," &c.—First edit.
<pb>
to instruct or amuse. By the industry of such, the
sciences, which in themselves are easy of access, affright
the learner with the severity of their appearance. He sees
them surrounded with speculation and subtlety, placed
there by their professors as if with a view of deterring his
approach. From hence it happens, that the generality of
readers fly from the scholar to the compiler, who offers
them a more safe and speedy conveyance.
From this fault, also, arises that mutual contempt
between the scholar and the man of the world, of which
every day's experience furnisheth instances.
The man of taste, however, stands neutral in this con-
troversy. He seems placed in a middle station, between
the world and the cell, between learning and common
sense. He teaches the vulgar on what part of a character
to lay the emphasis of praise, and the scholar where to
point his application so as to deserve it. By his means,
even the philosopher acquires popular applause, and all
that are truly great the admiration of posterity. By means
of polite learning alone, the patriot and the hero, the man
who praiseth virtue and he who practises it, who fights
successfully for his country, or who dies in its defence, be-
comes immortal. xBut this taste now seems cultivated with
less ardour than formerly, and consequently the public
must one day expect to see the advantages arising from it,
and the exquisite pleasures it affords our leisure, entirely
annihilated.1 For if, as it should seem, the rewards of
genius are improperly directed; if those who are capable of
supporting the honour of the times by their writings prefer
opulence to fame ; if the stage should be shut to writers of
merit, and open only to interest or intrigue; if such should
happen to be the vile complexion of the times, (and that it
is nearly so we shall shortly see;) the very virtue of the
'-' Instead of this, the first edition had " Let none affect to despise
future fame; the actions of even the lowest part of mankind testify a
desire of this kind. Wealth, titles, and several paltry advantages, are
secured for posterity, who can only give their applause in return. If all
ranks, therefore, are inspired with this passion, how great should his
encouragement be, who is capable of conferring it not only upon the
most deserving, but even upon the age in which he lives. Yet the honest
ambition of being admired by posterity, cannot be gratified without
continual efforts in the present age to deserve it," &c.—ED.
<pb>
age will be forgotten by posterity, and nothing remembered,
except our filling a chasm in the registers of time, or having
served to continue the species.
CHAPTER X.1
OF REWARDING GENIUS IN ENGLAND.
THERE is nothing authors are more apt to lament, than
want of encouragement from the age. Whatever their
differences in other respects, they are all ready to unite in
this complaint, and each indirectly offers himself as an
instance of the truth of his assertion.
The beneficed divine, whose wants are only imaginary,
expostulates as bitterly as the poorest author.2 Should
interest or good fortune advance the divine to a bishopric,
or the poor son of Parnassus into that place which the
other has resigned, both are authors no longer: the one
goes to prayers once a-day, kneels upon cushions of velvet,
and thanks gracious heaven for having made the circum-
stances of all mankind so extremely happy; the other
battens on all the delicacies of life, enjoys his wife and his
easy chair, and sometimes, for the sake of conversation,
deplores the luxury of these degenerate days.
All encouragements to merit are therefore misapplied,
which make the author too rich to continue his profession.
There can be nothing more just than the old observation,
that authors, like running horses, should be fed, but not
fattened. If we would continue them in our service, we
should reward them with a little money and a great deal of
praise, still keeping their avarice subservient to their ambi-
tion. Not that I think a writer incapable of filling an
employment with dignity: I would only insinuate, that
when made a bishop or statesman, he will continue to
please us as a writer no longer; as, to resume a former
1 In the first edition this chapter is headed, " Of the encouragement
of Learning."—ED.
2 "That ever snuffed his candle with finger and thumb."—First
edit.
<pb>
allusion, the running horse, when fattened, will still be fit
for very useful purposes, though unqualified for a courser.
No nation gives greater encouragements to learning than
we do; yet, at the same time, none are so injudicious in
the application. We seem to confer them with the same
view that statesmen have been known to'grant employ-
ments at court, rather as bribes to silence than incentives
to emulation.
Upon this principle, all our magnificent endowments of
colleges are erroneous; and, at best, more frequently enrich
the prudent than reward the ingenious. A lad whose
passions are not strong enough in youth to mislead him
from that path of science which his tutors, and not his in-
clinations, have chalked out, by four or five years perse-
verance, may probably obtain every advantage and honour
his college can bestow. I forget whether the simile has
been used before, but I would compare the man whose
youth has been thus passed in the tranquillity of dis-
passionate prudence, to liquors which never ferment, and
consequently, continue always muddy.1 Passions may
raise a commotion in the youthful breast, but they disturb
only to refine it. However this be, mean talents are often
rewarded in colleges with an easy subsistence. The candi-
dates for preferments of this kind, often regard their ad-
mission as a patent for future indolence;2 so that a life
begun in studious labour, is often continued in luxurious
affluence.
Among the universities abroad, I have ever observed
their riches and their learning in a reciprocal proportion,
their stupidity and pride increasing with their opulence.
Happening once, in conversation with Gaubius of Leyden,
to mention the college of Edinburgh, he began by com-
plaining, that all the English students which formerly
came to his university, now went entirely there; and the
fact surprised him more, as Leyden was now as well as
ever furnished with masters excellent in their respective
professions. He concluded by asking, if the professors of
1 This simile was used several times after its present use by Goldsmith
himself, as in the 'Belles Lettres ' essays (see vol. i., p. 327), the ' Life
of Bolingbroke'—his youth (see vol. iv.), and vol. iv., p. 8.—ED.
2 "Laziness."—First edit.
<pb>
Edinburgh were rich ? I replied, that the salary of a pro-
fessor there seldom amounted to more than thirty pounds
a-year. " Poor men," says he, " I heartily wish they were
better provided for; until they become rich, we can have
no expectation of English students at Leyden."
Premiums, also, proposed for literary excellence, when
given as encouragements to boys, may be useful; but
when designed as rewards to men, are certainly misap-
plied. We have seldom seen a performance of any great
merit in consequence of rewards proposed in this manner.
Who has ever observed a writer of any eminence, a candi-
date in so precarious a contest ? The man who knows the
real value of his own genius, will no more venture it upon
an uncertainty, than he who knows the true use of a
guinea will stake it with a sharper.1
Every encouragement given to stupidity, when known to
be such, is also a negative insult upon genius. This appears
in nothing more evident than the undistinguished success
of those who solicit subscriptions. When first brought
into fashion, subscriptions were conferred upon the in-
genious alone, or those who were reputed such. But at
present, we see them made a resource of indigence, and re-
quested, not as rewards of merit, but as a relief of distress.
If tradesmen happen to want skill in conducting their own
business, yet they are able to write a book ; if mechanics
want money, or ladies shame, they write books and solicit
subscriptions. Scarce a morning passes, that proposals
of this nature are not thrust into the half-opening doors of
the rich, with, perhaps, a paltry petition, showing the
author's wants, but not his merits. I would not willingly
prevent that pity which is due to indigence; but while the
streams of liberality are thus diffused, they must, in the
end, become proportionably shallow.
What, then, are the proper encouragements of genius ?
I answer, subsistence and respect; for these are rewards
congenial to its nature. Every animal has an aliment
peculiarly suited to its constitution. The heavy ox seeks
nourishment from earth; the light chameleon has been
supposed to exist on air; a sparer diet even than this will
1 The first edition adds—" by throwing a main."—ED.
<pb>
satisfy the man of true genius, for he makes a luxurious
banquet upon empty applause. It is this alone which has
inspired all that ever was truly great and noble among us.
It is, as Cicero finely calls it, the echo of virtue. Avarice
is the passion of inferior natures—money the pay of the
common herd. The author who draws his quill merely to
take -a purse, no more deserves success than he who
presents a pistol.1
When the link between patronage and learning was
entire, then all who deserved fame were in a capacity of
attaining it. When the great Somers was at the helm,
patronage was fashionable among our nobility. The
middle ranks of mankind, who generally imitate the great,
then followed their example, and applauded from fashion, if
not from feeling. I have heard an old poet2 of that glorious
age say, that a dinner with his lordship has procured him
invitations for the whole week following—that an airing in
his patron's chariot has supplied him with a citizen's coach
on every future occasion. For who would not be proud to
entertain a man who kept so much good company ?
But this link now seems entirely broken. Since the days
of a certain prime minister, of inglorious memory,3 the
1 Kenrick, Goldsmith's successor on the Monthly Review, in reviewing
this work made a gross personal attack upon the author, taxing him not
only with being himself one of the " bad trade of book-makers " he de-
nounced, but, in addition, a " sharper," &c., &c.; see the Review, Nov.
1759. For this, however, Kenrick, or the chief of the Review, Griffiths,
subsequently apologized (as late as June, 1762, after the collected
edition of the Chinese Letters was out), pleading that the offence given
was " undesigned."—ED.
2 Dr. Young.—PERCY. [This meeting of Young and Goldsmith may
have taken place when the latter was working for Richardson (1756 or
1757) i see 'Life,' pp. 15-17. Young died in 1765.—ED.]
3 Sir Robert Walpole, no doubt, as Cunningham and Forster say.
See Goldsmith's remarks on Sir Robert in the notice of Swift's' On
Poetry : A Rhapsody,' in the Preface to the' Beauties of English Poesy'
(Prefaces, in our vol. iv.).—"The severity of a poet, however, [in allu-
sion to Swift upon Walpole] gave Walpole very little uneasiness. A
man whose schemes, like this minister's, seldom extended beyond the
exigency of the year, but little regarded the contempt of posterity."
" Which," says Mr. Forster of this quotation, " is more than enough to
explain the never-ceasing indifference, dislike, or contempt avowed by
Horace Walpole for its author." See also ' The Logicians Refuted,'
vol. ii., p. 77.—ED.
<pb>
learned have been kept pretty much at a distance. A
jockey, or a laced player, supplies the place of the scholar,
poet, or the man of virtue. Those conversations, once the
result of wisdom, wit, and innocence, are now turned to
humbler topics, little more being expected from a com-
panion than a laced coat, a pliant bow, and an immoderate
friendship for a well-served table.
Wit, when neglected by the great, is generally despised
by the vulgar. Those who are unacquainted with the
world, are apt to fancy the man of wit as leading a very
agreeable life. They conclude, perhaps, that he is attended
to with silent admiration, and dictates to the rest of man-
kind with all the eloquence of conscious superiority. Very
different is his present situation. He is called an author,
and all know that an author is a thing only to be laughed
at. His person, not his jest, becomes the mirth of the
company. At his approach, the most fat unthinking face
brightens into malicious meaning. Even aldermen laugh,
and revenge on him the ridicule which was lavished on
their forefathers:
" Etiam victis redit in prsecordia virtus,
Victoresque cadunt."
It is indeed a reflection somewhat mortifying to the
author, who breaks his ranks, and singles out for public
favour, to think that he must combat contempt before he
can arrive at glory—that he must expect to have all the
fools of society united against him, before he can hope for
the applause of the judicious. For this, however, he must
prepare beforehand; as those who have no idea of the
difficulty of his employment, will be apt to regard his
inactivity as idleness—and, not having a notion of the pangs
of uncomplying thought in themselves, it is not to be ex-
pected they should have any desire of rewarding it in others.
Voltaire has finely described the hardships a man must
encounter, who writes for the public. I need make no
apology for the length of the quotation:
" Your fate, my dear Le Fevre, is too strongly marked
to permit your retiring. The bee must toil in making
honey, the silk-worm must spin, the philosopher must dis-
sect them, and you are born to sing of their labours. You
<pb>
must be a poet and a scholar, even though your inclina-
tions should resist: nature is too strong for inclination.
But hope not, my friend, to find tranquillity in the employ-
ment you are going to pursue. The route of genius is not
less obstructed with disappointment than that of ambition.
" If you have the misfortune not to excel in your profes-
sion as a poet, repentance must tincture all your future
enjoyments: if you succeed, you make enemies. You
tread a narrow path: contempt on one side, and hatred
on the other, are ready to seize you upon the slightest
deviation.
" But why must I be hated ? you will perhaps reply;
why must I be persecuted for having written a pleasing
poem, for having produced an applauded tragedy, or for
otherwise instructing or amusing mankind or myself ?
" My dear friend, these very successes shall render you
miserable for life. Let me suppose your performance has
merit—let me suppose you have surmounted the teasing
employments of printing and publishing,—how will you be
able to lull the critics, who, like Cerberus, are posted at all
the avenues of literature, and who settle the merits of every
new performance ? How, I say, will you be able to make
them open in your favour ? There are always three or four
literary journals in France, as many in Holland, each sup-
porting opposite interests. The booksellers who guide
these periodical compilations, find their account in being
severe; the authors employed by them have wretchedness
to add to their natural malignity. The majority may be in
your favour, but you may depend on being torn by the rest.
Loaded with unmerited scurrility, perhaps you reply; they
rejoin; both plead at the bar of the public, and both are
condemned to ridicule.
" But if you write for the stage, your case is still more
worthy compassion. You are there to be judged by men
whom the custom of the times has rendered contemptible.
Irritated by their own inferiority, they exert all their little
tyranny upon you, revenging upon the author the insults
they receive from the public. From such men, then, you
are to expect your sentence. Suppose your piece admitted,
acted: one single ill-natured jest from the pit is sufficient
to cancel all your labours. But allowing that it succeeds,
<pb>
there are an hundred squibs flying all abroad to prove that
it should not have succeeded. You shall find your brightest
scenes burlesqued by the ignorant; and the learned, who
know a little Greek, and nothing of their native language,
affect to despise you.
" But, perhaps, with a panting heart you carry your piece
before a woman of quality. She gives the labours of your
brain to her maid to be cut into shreds for curling her
hair; while the laced footman, who carries the gaudy livery
of luxury, insults your appearance, who bear the livery of
indigence.
" But granting your excellence has at last forced envy to
confess that your works have some merit; this, then, is all
the reward you can expect while living. However, for this
tribute of applause, you must expect persecution. You will
be reputed the author of scandal which you have never
seen, of verses you despise, and of sentiments directly con-
trary to your own. In short, you must embark in some
one party, or all parties will be against you.
" There are among us a number of learned societies,
where a lady presides, whose wit begins to twinkle when
the splendour of her beauty begins to decline. One or two
men of learning compose her ministers of state. These
must be flattered, or made enemies by being neglected.
Thus, though you had the merit of all antiquity united in
your person, you grow old in misery and disgrace. Every
place designed for men of letters, is filled up by men of
intrigue. Some nobleman's private tutor, some court flat-
terer, shall bear away the prize, and leave you to anguish,
and to disappointment." '
Yet it were well if none but the dunces of society were
combined to render the profession of an author ridiculous
or unhappy. Men of the first eminence are often found to
indulge this illiberal vein of raillery. Two contending
writers often, by the opposition of their wit, render their
profession contemptible in the eyes of ignorants,2 who should
have been taught to admire. And yet, whatever the reader
may think of himself, it is at least two to one but he is a
1 From Voltaire's Letter, ' A. M. Le Ferre. sur Les inconv6nients
attache's a la Litt^rature,' 1732.
" Percy's edition has " ignorant persons."—ED.
<pb>
greater blockhead than the most scribbling dunce he affects
to despise.
The poet's poverty is a standing topic of contempt. His
writing for bread is an unpardonable offence. Perhaps of
all mankind an author in these times is used most hardly.
We keep him poor, and yet revile his poverty. Like angry
parents who correct their children till they cry, and then
correct them for crying, we reproach him for living by his
wit, and yet allow him no other means to live.
His taking refuge in garrets and cellars,1 has of late been
violently objected to him, and that by men who, I dare
hope, are more apt to pity than insult his distress.2 Is
poverty the writer's fault? No doubt he knows how to
prefer a bottle of champaign to the nectar of the neigh-
bouring alehouse, or a venison pasty to a plate of potatoes.
Want of delicacy is not in him, but in us, who deny him
the opportunity of making an elegant choice.
Wit certainly is the property cf those who have it, nor
should we be displeased if it is the only property a man
sometimes has. We must not underrate him who uses it
for subsistence, and flies from the ingratitude of the age
even to a bookseller for redress. If the profession of an
author is to be laughed at by stupids, it is better sure3 to
be contemptibly rich, than contemptibly poor. For all the
wit that ever adorned the human mind, will, at present, no
more shield the author's poverty from ridicule, than his
high-topped gloves conceal the unavoidable omissions of
his laundress.
To be more serious: new fashions, follies, and vices, make
new monitors necessary in every age. An author may be
considered as a merciful substitute to the legislature. He
acts, not by punishing crimes, but preventing them.
However virtuous the present age, there may be still grow-
1 The first edition has also " and living among vermin;" which recalls
the picture of our author in Green Arbour Court, when he wrote on the
" Sagacity of Some Insects," and when, indeed, he wrote the principal
part of the present work. See ' Life,' p. 18; ' Letters,' vol. i., pp. 446,
447 ; See, vol. ii., p. 371.—ED.
2 Perhaps in allusion more particularly to' Pope's continual ridicule of
poor poets, Grub-street authors, &c., upon which Johnson (once of
" Grub-street") also remarks in his ' Life of Pope.'—ED.
3 Percy has " the stupid," and " is certainly better."—ED.
<pb>
ing employment for ridicule or reproof, for persuasion, or
satire. If the author be therefore still so necessary among
us, let us treat him with proper consideration, as a child of
the public, not a rent-charge on the community. And
indeed a child of the public he is in all respects; for while
so well able to direct others, how incapable is he frequently
found of guiding himself! His simplicity exposes him to all
the insidious approaches of cunning; his sensibility, to the
slightest invasions of contempt. Though possessed of for-
titude to stand unmoved the expected bursts of an earth-
quake, yet of feelings so exquisitely poignant as to agonize
under the slightest disappointment. Broken rest, tasteless
meals, and causeless anxiety, shorten his life, or render it
unfit for active employment; prolonged vigils and intense
application still farther contract his span, and make his
time glide insensibly away.1 Let us not, then, aggravate
those natural inconveniences by neglect; we have had suffi-
cient instances of this kind already. Sale and Moore2 will
suffice for one age at least. But they are dead, and their
sorrows are over. The neglected author of the Persian
Eclogues, which, however inaccurate, excel any in our laa-
guage, is still alive: happy, if insensible of our neglect, not
raging at our ingratitude.3 It is enough that the age has
already produced instances of men pressing foremost in
the lists of fame, and worthy of better times, schooled by
1 Compare with the opening paragraphs of Letter LXXXIV. of the
' Citizen of the World.'—ED.
J The first edition had " Sale, Savage, Amhurst, More." George Sale
translated the ' Koran,' and was one of the authors of the ' Universal
History' and the 'General Dictionary.' He died in 1736. Richard
Savage the poet died 1743. Nicholas Amhurst was editor of Bolingbroke
and Pulteney's Craftsman, and died in 1742. Edward Moore was the
author cf 'Fables for the Female Sex,' &c. He died in 1757. The
last three and their untoward fate are also alluded to by Goldsmith in
The Bee, No. 8 : see vol. ii., p. 451.—ED.
3 Our author here alludes to the insanity of Collins.—PERCT. [Collins
died mad in the following June. It is curious that Johnson in his' Lives
of the Poets,' has the date of this poet's death 1756, though Goldsmith
had previously both in his 1759 and 1774 editions of the' Polite Learn-
ing,' correctly stated that Collins was " still alive " in March, 1759. John-
son's date, however, still stands its ground. It is most generally given
as the correct date even now. Mr. Moy Thomas and Mr. E. W. Gosse
have, we believe, settled the date 1759 as beyond doubt. Mr. Moy
Thomas (Aldiue Poets edit, of Collins), says in allusion to the above
<pb>
continued adversity into an hatred of their kind, flying
from thought to drunkenness, yielding to the united pres-
sure of labour, penury, and sorrow, sinking unheeded,
without one friend to drop a tear on their unattended
obsequies, and indebted to charity for a grave.1
The author, when unpatronized by the great, has natu-'
rally recourse to the bookseller. There cannot be, perhaps,
imagined a combination more prejudicial to taste than this.
It is the interest of the one to allow as little for writing,
and of the other to write as much, as possible. Accordingly,
tedious compilations and periodical magazines are the result
of their joint endeavours. In these circumstances, the
author bids adieu to fame, writes for bread, and for that
only imagination is seldom called in. He sits down to
address the venal muse with the most phlegmatic apathy;
and as we are told of the Russian, courts his mistress by
falling asleep in her lap. His reputation never spreads in
a wider circle than that of the trade, who generally value
him, not for the fineness of his compositions, but the quan-
tity he works off in a given time.
A long habit of writing for bread thus turns the ambi-
tion of every author at last into avarice. He finds that he
has written many years, that the public are scarcely ac-
quainted even with his name; he despairs of applause, and
turns to profit which invites him. He finds that money
procures all those advantages, that respect, and that ease,
which he vainly expected from fame. Thus the man who,
under the protection of the great, might have done honour
to humanity, when only patronized by the bookseller, be-
comes a thing little superior to the fellow who works at the
press.2
early praise of Collins's poetry: " The praise of Goldsmith had not then
the value in men's eyes which it afterwards possessed; but it is doubtful
if Collins ever read this token of his future fame." Goldsmith also
criticises Collins at p. 384 of our vol. i. (' On Versification'), and in
the Introductions to the 'Beauties of English Poesy' in our vol. iv.
—ED.]
1 '; Among the dregs of mankind."—First edit.
2 " Sint Maccnates, non deerunt, Flacce, Marcmes."—first edit.
<pb>
CHAPTER XI.1
OF THE MARKS OF LITERARY DECAY IN FRANCE AND
ENGLAND.
THE faults already mentioned are such as learning is
often found to flourish under; but there is one of a much
more dangerous nature, which has begun to fix itself among
us,—I mean criticism, which may properly be called the
natural destroyer of polite learning. We have seen that
critics, or those whose only business is to write books upon
other books, are always more numerous, as learning is
more diffused ; and experience has shown, that instead of
promoting its interest, which they profess to do, they
generally injure it. This decay which criticism produces
may be deplored, but can scarcely be remedied, as the
man who writes against the critics is obliged to add him-
self to the number. Other depravations in the republic of
letters, such as affectation in some popular writer, leading
others into vicious imitation; political struggles in the
state ; a depravity of morals among the people ; ill-directed
encouragement, or no encouragement, from the great,—
these have been often found to co-operate in the decline of
literature; and it has sometimes declined, as in modern
Italy, without them; but an increase of criticism has
always portended a decay. Of all misfortunes, therefore,
in the commonwealth of letters, this of judging from rule,
and not from feeling, is the most severe. At such a tri-
bunal no work of original merit can please. Sublimity, if
carried to an exalted height, approaches burlesque, and
humour sinks into vulgarity. The person who cannot feel
may ridicule both as such, and bring rules to corroborate
his assertion. There is, in short, no excellence in writing
that such judges may not place among the neighbouring
defects. Eules render the reader more difficult to be
pleased, and abridge the author's power of pleasing.
If we turn to either country, we shall perceive evident
1 This chapter is made up of chaps, vi. and xi. of the first edition :
fee note at p. 491. Chap. xi. in the first edition is headed, ' Upon
Criticism.'—ED.
<pb>
symptoms of this natural decay beginning to appear. Upon
a moderate calculation, there seems to be as many volumes
of criticism published in those countries, as of all other
kinds of polite erudition united. Paris sends forth not less
than four literary journals every month, the Annee-lit-
teraire, and the Feuille, by Freron; the Journal Etrangere,
by the Chevalier d'Arc; and Le Mercure, by Marmontel.
We have two literary reviews1 in London, with critical
news-papers and magazines without number. The com-
pilers of these resemble the commoners of Rome; they
are all for levelling property, not by increasing their own,
but by diminishing that of others. The man who has any
good nature in his disposition must, however, be somewhat
displeased to see distinguished reputations often the sport
of ignorance,—to see, by one false pleasantry, the future
peace of a worthy man's life disturbed, and this only,
because he has unsuccessfully attempted to instruct or
amuse us. Though ill-nature is far from being wit, yet it
is generally laughed at as such. The critic enjoys the
triumph, and ascribes to his parts what is only due to his
effrontery." I fire with indignation, when I see persons
wholly destitute of education and genius indent to the
press, and thus turn book-makers, adding to the sin of
criticism the sin of ignorance also; whose trade is a bad
one, and who are bad workmen in the trade.2
When I consider those industrious men as indebted to
the works of others for a precarious subsistence, when I see
them coming down at stated intervals, to rummage the
bookseller's compter for materials to work upon, it raises a
smile, though mixed with pity. It reminds me of an animal
called by naturalists the soldier. " This little creature,"
says the historian, " is passionately fond of a shell, but not
1 The Monthly and the Critical, established respectively 1749 and
1756 : Goldsmith himself was a contributor to both. See 'Life,' pp. 17,
18, &c., and the ' Criticisms' in vol. iv.—ED.
2-2 Instead of this passage, the first edition has, in chap. vi.: " If
there be any, however, among these writers who being bred gentlemen
and scholars, are obliged to have recourse to such an employment for
subsistence, I wish them one more suited to their inclinations ; but for
such who, wholly destitute of education and genius, indent to the press,
and turn mere book-makers, they deserve the severest censure. These
add to the sin," &«.—ED.
<pb>
being supplied with one by nature, has recourse to the
deserted shell of some other. I have seen these harm-
less reptiles," continues he, " come down once a-year from
the mountains, rank and file, cover the whole shore, and
ply busily about, each in request of a shell to please it.
Nothing can be more amusing than their industry upon
this occasion. One shell is too big, another too little: they
enter and keep possession sometimes for a good while,
until one is, at last, found entirely to please. When all are
thus properly equipped, they march up again to the moun-
tains, and live in their new acquisition till under a necessity
of changing."
1 There is indeed scarce an error of which our present
writers are guilty,1 that does not arise from their opposing
systems; there is scarce an error that criticism cannot be
brought to excuse. From this proceeds the affected security
of our odes, the tuneless flow of our blank verse, the
pompous epithet, laboured diction, and every other devia-
tion from common sense, which procures the poet the
applause of the month:2 he is praised by all, read by a few,
and soon forgotten.
There never was an unbeaten path trodden by the poet
that the critic did not endeavour to reclaim him, by calling
his attempt innovation. This might be instanced in Dante,
who first followed nature, and was persecuted by the critics
as long as he lived. Thus novelty, one of the greatest
beauties in poetry, must be avoided, or the connoisseur be
displeased. It is one of the chief privileges, however, of
genius, to fly from the herd of imitators by some happy
singularity; for, should he stand still, his heavy pursuers will
at length certainly come up, and fairly dispute the victory.
'-1 " But there are still some men, whom fortune has blessed with
affluence, to whom the muse pays her morning visit, not like a creditor
but a friend: to this happy few, who have leisure to polish what they
write, and liberty to choose their own subjects, I would direct my advice,
which consists in a few words: Write what you think, regardless of the
critics. To persuade to this, was the chief design of this essay. To
break, or at least to loosen those bonds, first put on by caprice, and
afterwards drawn hard by fashion, is my wish. I have assumed the
critic only to dissuade from criticism. There is scarce an error of which
our present writers are guilty," &c.—First edit.
2 For " month," i.e. the monthly critic, read " connoisseur."—First edit.
<pb>
The ingenious Mr. Hogarth used to assert, that every one
except the connoisseur was a judge of painting. The same
may be asserted of writing. The public, in general, set the
whole piece in the proper point of view; the critic lays his
eye close to all its minuteness, and condemns or approves
in detail. And this may be the reason why so many
writers at present are apt to appeal from the tribunal of
criticism to that of the people.
From a desire in the critic of grafting the spirit of
ancient languages upon the English, have proceeded of late
several disagreeable instances of pedantry. Among the
number, I think we may reckon blank verse. Nothing but
the greatest sublimity of subject can render such a measure
pleasing; however, we now see it used upon the most
trivial occasions. It has particularly found its way into our
didactic poetry,1 and is likely to bring that species of com-
position into disrepute for which the English are deservedly
famous.
Those who are acquainted with writing, know that our
language runs almost naturally into blank verse. The
writers of our novels, romances, and all of this class, who
have no notion of style, naturally hobble into this unhar-
monious measure. If rhymes, therefore, be more difficult,
for that very reason I would have our poets write in
rhyme. Such a restriction upon the thought of a good
poet, often lifts and increases the vehemence of every sen-
timent ; for fancy, like a fountain, plays highest by dimi-
nishing the aperture. But rhymes, it will be said, are a
remnant of monkish stupidity, an innovation upon the
poetry of the ancients. They are but indifferently ac-
quainted with antiquity who make the assertion. Khymes
are probably of older date than either the Greek or Latin
dactyl and spondee. The Celtic, which is allowed to be the
first language spoken in Europe, has ever preserved them,
as we may find in the Edda of Iceland, and the Irish
carols, still sung among the original inhabitants of that
island. Olaus Wormius gives us some of the Teutonic
1 Mr. Cunningham says that Goldsmith is here alluding to Aken-
side's, Armstrong's, and Dyer's poems. See the reference to Mr.
Cunningham's remarks upon Goldsmith's theories of versification, &c.,
vol. i. p. 323.—ED.
III. L 1
<pb>
poetry in this way; and Pantoppidan, bishop of Bergen,
some of the Norwegian. In short, this jingle of sounds is
almost natural to mankind; at least it is so to our lan-
guage, if we may judge from many unsuccessful attempts
to throw it off.
I should not have employed so much time in opposing
this erroneous innovation, if it were not apt to introduce
another in its train,—I mean, a disgusting solemnity of
manner into our poetry; and, as the prose writer has been
ever found to follow the poet, it must consequently banish
in both all that agreeable trifling, which, if I may so ex-
press it, often deceives us into instruction.1 The finest sen-
timent and the most weighty truth may put on a pleasant
face, and it is even virtuous to jest when serious advice
must be disgusting. But, instead of this, the most trifling
performance among us now assumes all the didactic stiff-
ness of wisdom. The most diminutive son of fame, or of
famine, has his we and his us, his firstlies and his secondlies,
as methodical as if bound in cow-hide and closed with
clasps of brass. Were these Monthly Reviews and Maga-
zines frothy, pert, or absurd, they might find some pardon ;
but to be dull and dronish is an encroachment on the pre-
rogative of a folio. These things2 should be considered as
pills to purge melancholy; they should be made up in our
splenetic climate to be taken as physic, and not so as to
be used when we take it.3
However, by the power of one single 'monosyllable, our
critics have almost got the victory over humour amongst us.
Does the poet paint the absurdities of the vulgar, then he
is low; does he exaggerate the features of folly to render
1 " Dry reasoning and dull morality have no force with the wild fantas-
tic libertine. He must be met with smiles, and courted with the allure-
ments of gaiety. He must be taught to believe that he is in pursuit of
pleasure, and be surprised into reformation."—First edit.
2 " These pamphlets."—First edit.
3 " To be used when we take it," i.e., when we take physic. This,
we suppose, is a sally after the not too delicate manner of Swift. Next
comes the following paragraph in the first edition: " Some such law
should be enacted in the republic of letters, as we find takes place in the
House of Commons. As no man there can show his wisdom, unless
first qualified by three hundred pounds a year, so none here should
profess gravity, unless his work amounted to three hundred pages."
—ED.
<pb>
it more thoroughly ridiculous, he is then very low. In
short, they have proscribed the comic or satirical muse
from every walk but high life, which, though abounding in
fools as well as the humblest station, is by no means so
fruitful in absurdity.1 Among well-bred fools we may
despise much, but have little to laugh at; nature seems to
present us with a universal blank of silk, ribbons, smiles,
and whispers. Absurdity is the poet's game, and good-
breeding is the nice concealment of absurdities. The truth
is, the critic generally mistakes humour for wit, which is
a very different excellence. Wit raises human nature
above its level; humour acts a contrary part, and equally
depresses it. To expect exalted humour is a contradiction
in terms; and the critic, by demanding an impossibility
from the comic poet, has, in effect, banished new comedy
from the stage. But, to put the same thought in a dif-
ferent light. When an unexpected similitude in two objects
strikes the imagination—in other words, when a thing is
wittily expressed—all our pleasure turns into admiration of
the artist, who had fancy enough to draw the picture.
When a thing is humorously described, our burst of laughter
proceeds from a very different cause: we compare the
absurdity of the character represented with our own, and
triumph in our conscious superiority. No natural defect
can be a cause of laughter, because it is a misfortune to
which ourselves are liable. A defect of this kind changes
the passion into pity or horror. We only laugh at those
instances of moral absurdity, to which we are conscious we
ourselves are not liable. For instance, should I describe
a man as wanting his nose, there is no humour in this, as
it is an accident to which human nature is subject, and
may be any man's case; but, should I represent this man
without his nose as extremely curious in the choice of his
snuff-box, we here see him guilty of an absurdity of which
we imagine it impossible for ourselves to be guilty, and
therefore applaud our own good sense on the compa-
rison. Thus, then, the pleasure we receive from wit turns
on the admiration of another; that which we feel from
1 The author gave later expression to these sentiments on comedy
in his' She Stoops to Conquer' (act i. sc. 2), and essay on ' Sentimental
and Laughing Comedy ' (vol. i. p. 398).—ED.
<pb>
humour, centres in the admiration of ourselves. The poet,
therefore, must place the object he would have the subject
of humour in a state of inferiority; in other words, the
subject of humour must be low.
The solemnity worn by many of our modern writers, is,
I fear, often the mask of dulness; for certain it is, it seems
to fit every author who pleases to put it on. By the com-
plexion of many of our late publications, one might be apt
to cry out with Cicero, Givem, mehercule, non puto esse qui
his temporibua ridere possit,—On my conscience, I believe
we have all forgot to laugh in these days. Such writers
probably make no distinction between what is praised and
what is pleasing; between those commendations which the
reader pays his own discernment, and those which are the
genuine result of his sensations. It were to be wished,
therefore, that we no longer found pleasure with the in-
flated stylel that has for some years been looked upon as fine
writing, and which every young writer is now obliged to
adopt, if he chooses to be read. We should now dispense
with loaded epithet, and dressing up trifles with dignity.
For, to use an obvious instance, it is not those who make
the greatest noise with their wares in the streets that have
most to sell. Let us, instead of writing finely, try to write
naturally; not hunt after lofty expressions to deliver mean
ideas, nor be for ever gaping, when we only mean to deliver
a whisper.2
CHAPTEK XII.
OF THE STAGE.
OUR Theatre ' has been generally confessed to share in
this general decline, though3 partaking of the show and
decoration of the Italian opera, with the propriety and
1 " As our gentlemen writers have it therefore so much in their
power to lead the taste of the times, they may now part with the
inflated style," &c.— First edit.
2 For similar opinions upon poetry, &c., see the dedication to the
' Traveller,' the ' Vicar of Wakefield,' chap, viii., &c.—ED.
3-3 " May be regarded as partaking," &c.—First edit.
<pb>
«
declamation of French performance. The stage also is
more magnificent with us than any other in Europe, and
the people in general fonder of theatrical entertainment.
Yet still as our pleasures, as well as more important con-
cerns, are generally managed by party, the stage has felt its
influence. The managers, and all who espouse their side, are
for decoration and ornament; the critic, and all who have
studied French decorum, are for regularity and declama-
tion. Thus it is almost impossible to please both parties;
and the poet, by attempting it, finds himself often inca-
pable of pleasing either. If he introduces stage pomp, the
critic consigns his performance to the vulgar; if he indulges
in recital and simplicity, it is accused of insipidity, or dry
affectation.
From the nature, therefore, of our theatre, and the
genius of our country, it is extremely difficult for a dra-
matic poet to please his audience. But happy would he
be were these the only difficulties he had to encounter;
there are many other more dangerous combinations against
the little wit of the age. Our poet's performance must
undergo a process truly chemical, before it is presented to
the public. It must be tried in the manager's fire, strained
through a licenser,1 suffer from repeated corrections, till it
may be a mere caput mortuum when it arrives before the
public.
The success, however, of pieces upon the stage would be
of little moment, did it not influence the success of the
same piece in the closet. Nay, I think it would be more1
for the interests of virtue, if stage performances were read,
not acted; made rather our companions in the cabinet2 than
on the theatre. While we are readers, every moral senti-
ment strikes us in all its beauty, but the love scenes are
frigid, tawdry, and disgusting. When we are spectators,
all the persuasives to vice receive an additional lustre. The
love scene is aggravated, the obscenity heightened, the
best actors figure in the most debauched characters, while
the parts of morality,3 as they are called, are thrown to some
'-1 In place of these portions the first edition has several paragraphs,
which will be found in our Appendix, at p. 536.—ED.
2 The first edition has " closet."—ED.
3 The first edition has " of dull morality."—ED.]
<pb>
mouthing machine, who puts even virtue out of counte-
nance by his wretched imitation.1
2 But, whatever be the incentives to vice which are found
at the theatre, public pleasures are generally less guilty
than solitary ones. To make our solitary satisfaction truly
innocent, the actor is useful, as by his means the poet's
work makes its way from the stage to the closet; for all
must allow, that the reader receives more benefit by
perusing a well written play, than by seeing it acted.2
But how is this rule inverted on our theatres at present!
Old pieces are revived, and scarce any new ones admitted.
The actor is ever in our eye, and the poet seldom per-
mitted to appear; the public are again obliged to ruminate
[over]3 those hashes of absurdity, which were disgusting to
our ancestors even in an age of ignorance; and the stage,
instead of serving the people, is made subservient to the
interests of avarice.4
We seem to be pretty much in the situation of travel-
1 " The principal performers find their interest in choosing such parts
as tend to promote, not the benefit of society, but their own reputation ;
and in using arts which inspire emotions very different from those of
morality. How many young men go to the playhouse speculatively in
love with the rule of right, but return home actually enamoured of an
actress ? I have often attended to the reflections of the company upon
leaving the theatre; one actor had the finest pipe, but the other the
most melodious voice; one was a bewitching creature, another a charm-
ing devil; and such are generally our acquisitions at the playhouse : it
brings to my remembrance an old lady, who being passionately fond of
a famous preacher, went every Sunday to church, but, struck only with
his graceful manner of delivery, disregarded and forgot the truths of his
discourse."—First edit.
2-2 " But it is needless to mention the incentives to vice which are
found at the theatre, or the immorality of some of the performers. Such
impeachments, though true, would be regarded as cant, while their ex-
hibitions continue to amuse. I would only infer from hence, that an
actor is chiefly useful in introducing new performances upon the stage.
since the reader receives more benefit by perusing a well written play in
his closet, than by seeing it acted. I would also infer, that to the poet
is to be ascribed all the good that attends seeing plays, and to the actor
all the harm."—First edit.
' Percy added " over" (without the brackets).—ED.
4 " To the interests of an avaricious few. We must now tamely see
the literary honours of our country suppressed that an actor may dine
with elegance; we must tamely sit and see the celestial muse made a
slave to the histrionic daemon."—First edit.
<pb>
lers at a Scotch inn : vile entertainment is served up, com-
plained of, and sent down ; up comes worse, and that also
is changed; and every change makes our wretched cheer
more unsavoury. What must be done ? only sit down
contented, cry up all that comes before us, and admire
even the absurdities of Shakespear.
Let the reader suspend his censure. I admire the beau-
ties of this great father of our stage as much as they de-
serve, but could wish, for the honour of our country, and
for his honour too, that many of his scenes were forgotten.
A man blind of one eye should, always be painted in profile.
Let the spectator, who assists at any of these new revived
pieces, only ask himself whether he would approve such a
performance if written by a modern poet. I fear he will
find that much of his applause proceeds merely from the
sound of a name, and an empty veneration for antiquity.
In fact, the revival of those pieces of forced humour, far-
fetched conceit, and unnatural hyperbole, which have been
ascribed to Shakespear, is rather gibbeting than raising a
statue to his memory;l it is rather a trick of the actor, who
thinks it safest acting in exaggerated characters, and who,
by outstepping nature, chooses to exhibit the ridiculous
outre of a harlequin under the sanction of that venerable
name.
What strange vamp'd comedies, farcical tragedies, or
what shall I call them ? speaking pantomimes, have we not
of late seen! No matter what the play may be, it is the
actor who draws an audience. He throws life into all; all
are in spirits and merry, in at one door and out at another;
the spectator, in a fool's paradise, knows not what all this
means, till the last act concludes in matrimony. The piece
pleases our critics, because it talks old English; and it
pleases the galleries, because it has ribaldry.2 True taste,
or even common sense, are out of the question.
But great art must be sometimes used before they can
thus impose upon the public. To this purpose, a prologue
.written with some spirit generally precedes the piece, to
1 Compare with the remarks upon Shakspere in the ' Belles Lettres,'
essays on Metaphor, Hyperbole, &c., pp. 364, 381, and 407, vol. i., and
in other parts of this edition of Goldsmith's works.—ED.
2 The first edition has " fun."—ED.
<pb>
inform us that it was composed by Shakespear, or old Ben,
or somebody else who took them for his model. A face of
iron could not have the assurance to avow dislike; the
theatre has its partisans who understand the force of com-
binations, trained up to vociferation, clapping of hands,
and clattering of sticks; and though a man might have
strength sufficient to overcome a lion in single combat, he
may run the risk of being devoured 1 by an army of ants.1
. I am not insensible that third nights2 are disagreeable
drawbacks upon the annual profits of the stage. I am
confident it is much more to the manager's advantage to
furbish up all the lumber which the good sense of our
ancestors, but for his care, had consigned to oblivion. It
is not with him, therefore, but with the public I would ex-
postulate ; they have a right to demand respect, and sure3
those new3 revived plays are no instances of the manager's
deference.
I have been informed that no new play can be admitted
upon our theatres unless the author chooses to wait some
years, or, to use the phrase in fashion, till it comes to be
played in turn. A poet thus can never expect to contract
a familiarity with the stage, by which alone he can hope to
succeed; nor can the most signal success relieve immediate
want. Our Saxon ancestors had but one name for a wit
and a witch. I will not dispute the propriety of uniting
those characters then; but the man who, under the pre-
sent discouragements, ventures to write for the stage, what-
ever claim he may have to the appellation of a wit, at least
he has no right to be called a conjuror.4
From all that has been said upon the state of our theatre,
we may easily foresee whether it is likely to improve or de-
cline ; and whether the freeborn muse can bear to submit
'-' " By an army even of mice, he may run the risk of being eaten up,
marrow-bones and all."—First edit.
2 The authors' benefit nights. EYery third night, the third, the sixth,
and so on, was at this time the " author's night;" that is, the author
took the proceeds of the performance after deducting the night's ex-
penses.—ED.
3-8 Percy's edition has " surely those newly."—ED.
4 Here follow four paragraphs in the first edition which will now be
found at pp. 537, 538 of our Appendix. In these, probably, are the
passages which gave most offence to Garrick.—ED.
<pb>
to those restrictions which avarice or power would impose.
For the future, it is somewhat unlikely, that he whose
labours are valuable, or who knows their value, will turn
to the stage for either fame or subsistence, when he must
at once flatter an actor and please an audience.1
CHAPTEE
ON m«VERSITIES.
INSTEAD of losing myself in a subject of such extent, I
shall only offer a few thoughts as they occur, and leave
their connection to the reader.
We seem divided, whether an education formed by travel-
ling or by a sedentary life be preferable. We see more of
the world by travel, but more of human nature by remain-
ing at home; as in an infirmary, the student who only
attends to the disorders of a few patients, is more likely to
understand his profession than he who indiscriminately
examines them all.
A youth just landed at the Brille resembles a clown at a
puppet-show; carries his amazement from one miracle to
another; from this cabinet of curiosities to that collec-
tion of pictures: but wondering is not the way to grow
wise.
Whatever resolutions we set ourselves not to keep com-
pany with our countrymen abroad, we shall find them
broken when once we leave home. Among strangers we
consider ourselves as in a solitude, and it is but natural to
desire society.
1 " Let no manager impute this to spleen or disappointment. I only
assert the claims of the public, and endeavour to vindicate a profession
which has hitherto wanted a defender. A mean or mercenary conduct
may continue for some time to triumph over opposition, but it is possible
the public will at last be taught to vindicate their privileges. Perhaps
there may come a time when the poet will be at liberty to increase the
entertainments of the people; but such a period may possibly not arise
till our discouragements have banished poetry from the stage."—First
edit. [See also p. 538, and its note.—ED.]
<pb>
In all the great towns of Europe there are to be found
Englishmen residing either from interest or choice. These
generally lead a life of continued debauchery. Such are
the countrymen a traveller is likely to meet with.
This may be the reason why Englishmen are all thought
to be mad or melancholy by the vulgar abroad. Their
money is giddily and merrily spent among sharpers of their
own country; and when that is gone, of all nations the
English bear worst that disorder called the maladie du poche.
Countries wear very different appearances to travellers
of different circumstances. A man who is whirled through
Europe in a post-chaise, and the pilgrim who walks the
grand tour on foot, will form very different conclusions.1
To see Europe with advantage, a man should appear in
various circumstances of fortune; but the experiment
would be too dangerous for young men.
There are many things relative to other countries which
can be learned to more advantage at home; their laws and
policies are among the number.
The greatest advantages which result to youth from
travel, are an easy address, the shaking off2 national pre-
judices, and the finding nothing ridiculous in national
peculiarities. The time spent in these acquisitions could
have been more usefully employed at home. An education
in a college seems, therefore, preferable.3
We attribute to universities either too much or' too little.
Some assert that they are the only proper places to advance
learning; while others deny even their utility in forming
an education. Both are erroneous.
Learning is most advanced in populous cities, where
chance often conspires with industry to promote, it; where
the members of this large university, if I may so call it,
catch manners as they rise ; study life, not logic, and have
the world for correspondents.
' In the first edition our author added, "Baudinexpertus loyuor;" for
he travelled through France, &c. on foot.—PERCY.
1 The first edition has " wearing off."—ED.
3 An additional paragraph occurs here in th? first edition, as follows :
—" It has lately been disputed, whether the arts and sciences do most
benefit or injury to mankind. Mere speculative trifling. Ask the house-
breaker or highwayman, in what university they were bred. They will
answer—in none."—ED.
<pb>
The greatest number of universities have ever been
founded in times of the greatest ignorance.
New improvements in learning are seldom adopted in
colleges until admitted everywhere else. And this is right:
we should always be cautious of teaching the rising genera-
tion uncertainties for truth. Thus, though the professors
in universities have been too frequently found to oppose
the advancement of learning, yet, when once established,
they are the properest persons to diffuse it.1
There is more knowledge to be acquired from one page
of the volume of mankind, if the scholar only knows how
to read, than in volumes of antiquity. We grow learned,
not wise, by too long a continuance at college.
This points out the time in which we should leave the
university. Perhaps the age of twenty-one, when at our
universities the first degree is generally taken, is the proper
period.
The universities of Europe may be divided into three
classes. Those upon the old scholastic establishment,
where the pupils are immured, talk nothing but Latin, and
support every day syllogistical disputations in school-philo-
sophy. Would not one be apt to imagine this was the
proper education to make a man a fool ? Such are the
universities of Prague, Louvain, and Padua. The second
is, where the pupils are under few restrictions ; where all
scholastic jargon is banished; where they take a degree
when they think proper, and live not in the college, but
[the] city. Such are Edinburgh, Leyden, Gottingen,
G-eneva. The third is a mixture of the two former, where
the pupils are restrained, but not confined; where many,
though not all, the absurdities of scholastic philosophy are
suppressed, and where the first degree is taken after four
years matriculation. Such are Oxford, Cambridge, and
Dublin.
As for the first class, their absurdities are too apparent
to admit of a parallel. It is disputed which of the two last
are most conducive to national improvement.
Skill in the professions is acquired more by practice than
study; two or three years may be sufficient for learning
1 " The rudiments of learning are best implanted in a college; the
cultivation of it is best promoted in the world. —First edit.
<pb>
their rudiments. The universities of Edinburgh, <fec. grant
a licence for practising them when the student thinks
proper, which our universities refuse till after a residence
of several years.
The dignity of the professions may be supported by this
dilatory proceeding; but many men of learning are thus too
long excluded from the lucrative advantages which superior
skill has a right to expect.
Those universities must certainly be most frequented,
which promise to give in two years the advantages which
others will not under twelve.
The man who has studied a profession for three years,
and practised it for nine more will certainly know more
of his business than he who has only studied it for
twelve.
The universities of Edinburgh, &c. must certainly be
most proper for the study of those professions in which
men choose to turn their learning to profit as soon as pos-
sible.
The universities of Oxford, &c. are improper for this,
since they keep the student from the world, whidh, after a
certain time, is the only true school of improvement.
When a degree in the professions can be taken only by
men of independent fortunes, the number of candidates in
learning is lessened, and, consequently the advancement of
learning retarded.
This slowness of conferring degrees is a remnant of
scholastic barbarity. Paris, Louvain, and those universities
which still retain their ancient institutions, confer the doc-
tor's degree slower even than we.
The statutes of every university should be considered as
adapted to the laws of its respective government. Those
should alter as these happen to fluctuate.
Pour years spent in the arts, (as they are called in col-
leges), is, perhaps, laying too laborious a foundation. Enter-
ing a profession without any previous acquisitions of this
kind, is building too bold a superstructure.
Teaching by lecture, as at Edinburgh, may make men
scholars, if they think proper; but instructing by exami-
nation, as at Oxford, will make them so often against their
inclination.
<pb>
Edinburgh only disposes the student to receive learning;
Oxford often makes him actually learned.
In a wprd, were I poor, I should send my son to Leyden
or Edinburgh, though the annual expense in each, particu-
larly in the first, is very great. Were I rich, I would send
him to one of our own universities. By an education re-
ceived in the first, he has the best likelihood of living ; by
that received in the latter, he has the best chance of becom-
ing great.
We have of late heard much of the necessity of studying
oratory. Vespasian was the first who paid professors of
rhetoric for publicly instructing youth at Rome. However,
those pedants never made an orator.
The best orations that ever were spoken were pronounced
in the parliaments of King Charles the First. These men
never studied the rules of oratory.
Mathematics are, perhaps, too much studied at our uni-
versities. This seems a science to which the meanest intel-
lects are equal.1 I forget who it is that says, " All men
.might understand mathematics, if they would."
The most methodical manner of lecturing, whether on
morals or nature, is, first rationally to explain, and then
produce the experiment. The most instructive method is
to show the experiment first; curiosity is then excited, and
attention awakened to every subsequent deduction. From
hence it is evident, that, in a well formed education a course
of history should ever precede a course of ethics.
The sons of our nobility are permitted to enjoy greater
liberties in our universities than those of private men. I
should blush to ask the men of learning and virtue who
preside in our seminaries, the reason of such a prejudicial
1 This is partly true, but not to the extent which is implied in our
author's general assertion. The elements of the science may certainly
be acquired without any extraordinary share of intellect; but surely
distinguished proficiency in the higher branches of mathematics implies
something more than the industrious efforts of the " meanest intellects."
Goldsmith himself was a very indifferent mathematician; and this will
perhaps account sufficiently for his attempt to underrate the importance
of the science, and his wish to consider its acquisition as the despicable
triumph of plodding mediocrity.—B. [See Prof. De Morgan on Gold-
smith s dislike to mathematics, in the Appendix to our 'Life,' vol. i.
p. 61. See also vol. i. pp. 326, 407, &c.—ED.]
<pb>
distinction. Our youth should there be inspired with a love
of philosophy; and the first maxim among philosophers is,
—that Merit only makes distinction.
Whence has proceeded the vain magnificence of expen-
sive architecture in our colleges ? Is it that men study to
more advantage ir. a palace than in a cell? One single
performance of taste or genius confers more real honours
on its parent university, than all the labours of the chisel.
Sure pride itself has dictated to the fellows of our col-
leges the absurd passion of being attended at meals, and
on other public occasions, by those poor men, who, willing
to be scholars, come in upon some charitable foundation.
It implies a contradiction, for men to be at once learning
the liberal arts, and at the same time treated as slaves; at
once studying freedom, and practising servitude.
CHAPTEE XIV.
THE CONCLUSION.
EVERY subject acquires an adventitious importance to
him who considers it with application. He finds it more
closely connected with human happiness than the rest of
mankind are apt to allow; he sees consequences resulting
from it which do not strike others with equal conviction;
and, still pursuing speculation beyond the bounds of reason,
too frequently becomes ridiculously earnest in trifles or
absurdity.
It will perhaps be incurring this imputation, to deduce
a universal degeneracy of manners from so slight an origin
as the depravation of taste; to assert that, as a nation grows
dull, it sinks into debauchery. Yet such, probably, may be
the consequence of literary decay; or, not to stretch the
thought beyond what it will bear, vice and stupidity are
always mutually productive of each other.
Life, at the greatest and best, has been compared to a
froward child, that must be humoured and played with till
it falls asleep, and then all the care is over. Our few years
are laboured away in varying its pleasures: new amuse-
<pb>
ments are pursued with studious attention; the most child-
ish vanities are dignified with titles of importance; and
the proudest toast of the most aspiring philosopher is no
more, than that he provides his little playfellows the greatest
pastime with the greatest innocence.1
Thus the mind, ever wandering after amusement, when
abridged of happiness on one part, endeavours to find it on
another; when intellectual pleasures are disagreeable, those
of sense will take the lead. The man who in this age is
enamoured of the tranquil joys of study and retirement,
may in the next, should learning be fashionable no longer,
feel an ambition of being foremost at a horse-course; or, if
such could be the absurdity of the times, of being himself
a jockey. Reason and appetite are therefore masters of our
revels in turn; and as we incline to the one, or pursue the
other, we rival angels, or imitate the brutes. In the pur-
suit of intellectual pleasure lies every virtue; of sensual,
every vice.
It is this difference of pursuit which marks the morals
and characters of mankind; which lays the line between
the enlightened philosopher and the half-taught citizen j
between the civil citizen and illiterate peasant; between the
law-obeying peasant and the wandering savage of Africa,
an animal less mischievous, indeed, than the tiger, because
endued with fewer powers of doing mischief. The man, the
nation, must therefore be good, whose chiefest luxuries
consist in the refinement of reason ; and reason can never
be universally cultivated, unless guided by Taste, which may
be considered as the link between science and common
sense, the medium through which learning should ever be
seen by society.
Taste will therefore often be a proper standard, when
others fail, to judge of a nation's improvement, or degene-
racy, in morals. We have often no permanent charac-
teristics by which to compare the virtues or the vices of our
ancestors with our own. A generation may rise and pass
away without leaving any traces of what it really was; and
1 Sir Wm. Temple is referred to and quoted in the first three lines of
this paragraph, which are the concluding words of the' Discourse of
Poetry' (Temple's Works, 1720, i. 249). Goldsmith used the same-
in his ' Good-Natured Man,' act i.; see vol. ii. p. 155.—ED.
-'
<pb>
all complaints of our deterioration may be only topics of
declamation, or the cavillings of disappointment: but in
Taste we have standing evidence; we can with precision
compare the literary performances of our fathers with our
own, and from their excellence or defects determine the
moral, as well as the literary, merits of either.
If, then, there ever comes a time when Taste is so far
depraved among us that critics shall load every work of
genius with unnecessary comment, and quarter their empty
performances with the substantial merit of an author, both
for subsistence and applause ; if there comes a time when
censure shall speak in storms, but praise be whispered in
the breeze, while real excellence often finds shipwreck in
either; if there be a time when the Muse shall seldom be
heard, except in plaintive elegy, as if she wept her own
decline, while lazy compilations supply the place of original
thinking; should there ever be such a time, may succeeding
critics, both for the honour of our morals, as well as our
learning, say, that such a period bears no resemblance to
the present age!
<pb>
BEING PORTIONS OF THE FIRST EDITION WHICH
GOLDSMITH EXCLUDED FROM THE
SECOND.1
[I-]
CHAPTER IV.
A PARALLEL BETWEEN THE RISE AND DECLINE OF ANCIENT
AND MODERN LEARNING.2
FEW subjects have been more frequently and warmly de-
bated, than the comparative superiority of the ancients and
modems. It is unaccountable how a dispute so trifling,
could be contested with so much virulence. A dispute of
this nature could have no other consequences, if decided,
but to teach young writers to despise the one side or the
other. A dispute, therefore, which, if determined, might
tend rather to prejudice our taste than improve it, should
have been argued with good-nature, as it could not with
success. For mere critics to be guilty of such scholastic
rage, is not uncommon, but for men of the first rank of
fame to be delinquent also, is, I own, surprising.
1 For the remainder of the passages of the first edition which were
excluded from the second, see the foot-notes to the text, ante. Mr.
Forster has very justly said that the first edition of this' Enquiry' is of
most value as showing us the author. Mr. Forster terms the work " An
Appeal for Authors by Profession," so partly using the title of Ralph's
' The Case of Authors by Profession,' a book published the year before,
1758, which was also viewed as an attack upon Garrick and his treat-
ment of the poor authors of the time.—ED.
2 Page 41 in the first edition.—ED.
III. M M
</div>
<pb>
<div id="appendix to the ' enquiry.'" code="4" wordcount="5004">
The reflecting reader need scarcely be informed, that this
contested excellence can be decided in favour of neither.
They have both copied from different originals, described
the manners of different ages; have exhibited nature as
they found her, and both are excellent in separate imita-
tions. Homer describes his gods as his countrymen believed
them. Virgil, in a more enlightened age, describes his with
a greater degree of respect; and Milton still rises infinitely
above either. The machinery of Homer is best adapted to
an unenlightened idolater; that of the Roman poet to a
more refined heathen; and that of Milton, to a reader illu-
minated by revelation. Had Homer wrote like Milton, his
countrymen would have despised him; had Milton adopted
the theology of the ancient bard, he had been truly ridicu-
lous. Again, should I depreciate Plautus for not enliven-
ing his pieces with the characters of a coquet, or a marquis,
so humorous in modern comedy ? or Mollere, for not intro-
. ducing a legal bawd, or a parasitical boaster, so highly
finished in the Roman poet ? My censure, in either case,
would be as absurd as his who should dislike a geographer
for not introducing more rivers or promontories into a
country, than nature had given it; or the natural historian
for not enlivening his description of a dead landscape with
a torrent, a cataract, or a volcano.
The parallel between antiquity and ourselves can there-
fore be managed to advantage only by comparing the rise
and progress of ancient and modern learning together, so
that being apprised of the causes of corruption in one, we
may be upon our guard against any similar depravatious in
the other.
[II.]
CHAPTER VII.
THE POLITE LEARNING OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE
INCAPABLE OF COMPARISON.1
WHATEVER preference the vulgar of every nation may
think due to their own in particular, the learned, who look
1 Page 82 in the first edition. It would follow at ante, p. 491.—ED.
<pb>
beyond the bounds of national prejudice and are citizens of
the world,1 seem unanimous in regarding the English and
French as the principal literary supporters of the present
age. Their emulation in learning as well as in power, have
divided the wits not less than the armies of Europe. ' A
niuno e nascosto,' says a modern writer, ' come la Francia
e 1'Inghilterra sono rivali nella politica, nel commercio,
nella gloria delle arme e delle lettere."
This acknowledged superiority was, however, no easy
conquest over that national pride with which every country
is more or less tinctured. Every part of Europe was at
one time or another candidates for this pre-eminence, which
though they had not the good fortune to obtain, their at-
tempts served in a subordinate degree to assist and refine
the taste of their cotemporaries. Thus Spain exhibited fine
examples of humour; Italy of delicacy; and Holland of
freedom in enquiry. But to blend these excellencies, and
arrive at perfection, seemed reserved for the poets and
philosophers of England and France in the illustrious reigns
of Queen Anne and Louis XTV. The writers of that period
not only did honour to their respective countries, but even
to human nature. Like stars lost in each other's bright-
ness, though no single writer attracts our attention alone,
yet their conjunction diffuses such brightness upon the age,
as will give the minutest actions of those two reigns an
importance which the revolutions of empire will want that
were transacted in greater obscurity.
Yet that excellence which now excites the admiration of
Europe, served at that period of which I am speaking only
to promote envy in the respective writers of those two
countries. They both took every method to depreciate the
merit of each other; the French seldom mentioned the
English but with disrespect, put themselves foremost in
every literary contest, and, to leave the English no colour
of competition, placed the Italians in the second rank. The
English, on the other hand, regarded the French as triflers,
accused the flimsy texture of their style, and the false bril-
liancy of their sentiments. Yet, while each thus loaded
the other with contempt, it seemed as if done with a view
1 Perhaps Goldsmith's first use of this term. See also vol. iii. p. 1.—ED.
<pb>
of having their mutual plagiarism pass with less suspicion.
In works of entertainment, we borrowed from the French
unsparingly ; and they plundered our serious performances
with as little compunction. Europe, however, regarded the
contest with impartiality, and the debate seems at last de-
termined. Their writings are allowed to have more taste,
ours more truth. We are allowed the honour of striking
out sentiments, they of dressing them in the most pleasing
form. If we have produced reasoners who have refined
mankind, it is by means of French translations and ab-
stracts that they are generally known in Europe. Their
language has prevailed, and our philosophy.
And this, indeed, is all the English had a right to expect
in a contest of this nature, nor have they any just reason
to regret not being chosen supreme in taste as well as
truth; for if we only consider how different our manners
are from those of every other nation on the continent; how
little we are visited by travellers of discernment; how
ignorant our neighbours are of our various absurdities and
humours; if we consider this, it cannot be expected that
our works of taste, which imitate our peculiar manners,
can please those that are unacquainted with the originals
themselves. Though our descriptions and characters are
drawn from nature, yet they may appear exaggerated, or
faintly copied, to those who, unacquainted with the pecu-
liarities of our island, have no standard by which to make
the comparison.
The French are much more fortunate than us in this
particular. An universal sameness of character appears to
spread itself over the whole continent, particularly the fools
and coxcombs of every country abroad seem almost cast in
the same mould. The battered beau, who affects the boy
at threescore, or the pctit-maitre, "wlio would be a man af
fifteen, are characters which may be seen in every coffee-
house out of England. The French pictures, therefore, of
life and manners are immediately allowed to be just, be-
cause foreigners are acquainted with the models from
whence they are 'copied. The Marquis of Moliere strikes
all Europe. Sir John Falstaff, with all the merry men of
Eastcheap, are entirely of England, and please the English
alone.
<pb>
Let us then "be satisfied, the world has allowed us supe-
riority in the strength and justness of our sentiments, for
it hath truth as a standard by which to compare them; we
are placed inferior in regard to taste, for in this there is no
standard to judge of our desert, our manners being un-
known. Truth is a positive, taste a relative excellence.
We may justly appeal from the sentence of our judges;
though we must do them the justice to own that their ver-
dict has been impartial.
But it may be objected, that this is setting up a parti-
cular standard of taste in every country ; this is removing
that universal one which has hitherto united the armies
and enforced the commands of criticism; by this reasoning
the critics of one country will not be proper guides to the
writers of another; Grecian or Roman rules will not be
generally binding in France or England ; but the laws de-
signed to improve our taste, by this reasoning, must be
adapted to the genius of every people, as much as those
enacted to promote morality.
What I propose,as objections, are really the sentiments
I mean to prove, not to obviate. I must own it as my
opinion, that if criticism be at all requisite to promote the
interests of learning, its rules' should be taken from
among the inhabitants, and adapted to the genius and
temper of the country it attempts to refine. I must own
it, though, perhaps, by this opinion's prevailing, many a
scholium of the ancients and many a folio of criticism
translated from the French, now in repute among us,
would infallibly sink into oblivion. English taste,1 like
English liberty, should be restrained only by laws of its
own promoting.
But to use argument as well as assertion, let us take a
nearer view of what is called taste, examine its standard,
see if foreign critics are just in setting up theirs as a model
to us, or whether we be right in adopting their proffered
improvements. As the disquisition, however, is dry, I shall
study conciseness.
All objects affect us with pleasure one of these two
1 It will be remembered that the author's first idea of a title for this
work was ' The Present State of Taste and Literature in Europe :' see
introductory note, p. 465.—ED.
M M 2
<pb>
ways, either by immediately gratifying the senses with
pleasing sensations, or by being thought in a secondary
manner capable of making other objects contribute to this
effect. The pleasures of immediate sensation are coeval
with our senses, and, perhaps, most vivid in infancy; the
secondary source of pleasure results from experience only,
from considering the analogy of nature, or the capacity a
part has to unite to a whole. The pleasures of the first
sort, are derived from the beauty of the object; those of
the second, from a consideration of its use. The first are
natural; no art can increase them without mending the
organ which was to give them admission. The second are
artificial, and continually altering, as whim, climate, or
seasons direct. To illustrate my meaning. The beauty of
a guinea, for instance, its regular figure and shining colour,
are equally obvious to the senses, in every country and
climate ; these qualities please the wildest savage as much
as the most polished European; as far as it affects the
senses, the pleasure a guinea gives is, therefore, in every
country the same.
But the consideration of the uses it can be turned to, are
another source of pleasure, which is different in different
countries. A native of Madagascar prefers to it a glass
bead; a native of Holland prefers it to every thing else.
The pleasure then of its sensible qualities are every where
the same; those of its secondary qualities every where
different. He whom nature has furnished with the most
vivid perceptions of beauty, and to whom experience has
suggested the greatest number of uses, in the contempla-
tion of any object, may be said to receive the greatest
pleasure that object is capable of affording. Thus the bar-
barian finds some small pleasure in the contemplation of
a guinea; the enlightened European, who is acquainted
with its uses still more than him; the chemist, who be-
sides this, knows the peculiar fixedness and malleability of
the metal, most of all. This capacity of receiving pleasure,
may be called Taste in the objects of nature. The polite
arts, in all their variety, are only an imitation of nature.
He then must excel in them, who is capable of inspiring
us at once with the most vivid perceptions of beauty, and
with the greatest number of experimental uses in any ob-
<pb>
ject described. But as the artist, to give vivid perceptions,
must be perspicuous and concise, and yet to exhibit useful-
ness requires minuteness, here are two opposite qualities
required in the writer, in one of which his imagination, in
the other his reasoning faculty is every moment liable to
offend; what has he in this case to guide him ? Taste is,
perhaps, his only director. Taste in writing, is the exhibition
of the greatest quantity of beauty and of use that may lie ad-
mitted into any description without counteracting each
other.
The perfection of taste, therefore, proceeds from a know-
ledge of what is beautiful and useful. Criticism professes
to increase our taste. But our taste cannot be increased
with regard to beauty; because, as has been shown, our
perceptions of this kind cannot be increased, but are most
vivid in infancy. Criticism then can only improve our
taste in the useful. But this, as was observed, is different
in every climate and country ; what is useful in one climate
being often noxious in another; therefore, criticism must
understand the nature of the climate and country, &c.
before it gives rules to direct Taste. In other words,
every country should have a national system of criticism.
In fact, nothing can be more absurd than rules to direct
the taste of one country drawn from the manners of an-
other. There may be some general marks in nature, by
which all writers are to proceed; these, however, are ob-
vious, and might as well have never been pointed out; but
to trace the sources of our passions, to mark the evanescent
boundaries between satiety and disgust, and how far ele-
gance differs from finery, requires a thorough knowledge
of the people to whom the criticism is directed.
If, for instance, the English be a people who look upon
death as an incident no way terrible, but sometimes fly to
it for refuge from the calamities of life, why should a
Frenchman be disgusted at our bloody stage? there is
nothing hideous in the representation to one of us, what-
ever there might be to him.
We have long been characteriz'd as a nation of spleen,
and our rivals on the continent as a land of levity. Ought
they to be offended at the melancholy air which many of
our modern poets assume, or ought we to be displeased
<pb>
with them for all their harmless trifling upon pincushions,
parrots, and pretty faces ? What is rational with us, be-
comes with them formality : and what is fancy at Paris, is
at London fantastical. Critics should, therefore, imitate
physicians, and consider every country as having a peculiar
constitution, and consequently requiring a peculiar re-
gimen.
[III.]
CHAPTEE XII.
OF THE STAGE.
[This passage follows the text of the second edition at " against the
little wit of the age." See p. 517, ante.—ED.]
*****
Our poet's performance1 must undergo a process truly
chymical before it is presented to the public. It must be
tried in the manager's fire, strained through a licenser, and
purified in the Eeview, or the news-paper of the day. At
this rate before it can come to a private table, it may pro-
bably be a mere caput mortuum, and only proper entertain-
ment for the licenser, manager, or critic himself. But it
may be answered, that we have a sufficient number of plays
upon our theatres already, and therefore there is no need
of new ones. But are they sufficiently good ? And is the
credit of our age nothing ? Must our present times pass
away unnoticed by posterity ? We are desirous of leaving
them liberty, wealth, and titles, and we can have no recom-
pense but their applause. The title of " learned " given to
an age, is the most glorious applause, and shall this be dis-
regarded ? Our reputation among foreigners will quickly
be discontinued, when we discontinue our efforts to deserve
it, and shall we despise their praise ? Are our new absur-
dities, with which no nation more abounds, to be left un-
noticed ? Is the pleasure such performances give upon the
perusal, to be entirely given up ? If these are all matters
1 Page 161 in the first edition.—ED.
<pb>
of indifference, it then signifies nothing, whether we are to
be entertained with the actor or the poet, with fine senti-
ments, or painted canvas, or whether the dancer, or the
carpenter, be constituted master of the ceremonies.
But they are not matters of indifference. Every age pro-
duces new follies and new vices, and one absurdity is often
displaced in order to make room for another. The dramatic
poet, however, who should be, and has often been, a firm
champion in the cause of virtue, detects all the new machi-
nations of vice, levels his satire at the rising structures of
folly, or drives her from behind the retrenchments of
fashion. Thus far then, the poet is useful; but how far the
actor, that dear favourite of the public,'may be so, is a
question next to be determined.
As the poet's merit is often not sufficient to introduce
his performance among the public with proper dignity, he
is often obliged to call in the assistance of decoration and
dress to contribute to this effect. By this means a per-
formance which pleases on the stage, often instructs in the
closet, and for one who has seen it acted, hundreds will be
readers. The actor then is useful, by introducing the works
of the poet to the public with becoming splendour; but
when these have once become popular, I must confess my-
self so much a sceptic as to think it would be more for the
interests of virtue, if
(Line 29 of p. 517, ante, carries on the argument.—ED.]
* # # # #
Yet getting a playl on even in three or four years, is a
privilege reserved only for the hapr>v few who have the
arts cf CO ur Ling the manager as well as the muse: who
Jiave adulation to please his vanity, powerful patrons to
support their merit, or money to indemnify disappointment.
The poet must act like our beggars at Christmas, who lay
the first shilling on the plate for themselves. Thus all wit
is banished from the stage, except it be supported by
friends or fortune; and poets are seldom over-burthened
with either.
1 Page 173 in the first edition. The matter would come in after
-" called a conjuror," line 29, p. 520, ante.—ED.
<pb>
I am not at present writing for a party, but above thea-
trical connections in every sense of the expression; I have
no particular spleen against the fellow who sweeps the
stage with the besom, or the hero who brushes it with his
train.1 It were a matter of indifference to me, whether our
heroines are in keeping, or our candle-snuffers burn their
fingers, did not such make a great part of public care and
polite conversation. It is not these, but the age I would
reproach: the vile complexion of the times, when those
employ our most serious thoughts, and separate us into
parties, whose business is only to amuse our idlest hours.
I cannot help reproaching our meanness in this respect;
for our stupidity and our folly will be remembered, when
even the attitudes and eye-brows of a favourite actor shall
be forgotten.
In the times of Addison and Steele, players were held in
greater contempt than, perhaps, they deserved. Honest
Easteourt, Verbruggen, and Underhill, were extremely
poor, and assumed no airs of insolence. They were con-
tented with being merry at a city feast, with promoting
the mirth of a set of cheerful companions, and gave their
jest for their reckoning. At that time, it was kind to say
something in defence of the poor good-natured creatures,
if it were only to keep them in good humour; but at pre-
sent, such encouragements are unnecessary. Our actors
assume all that state off the stage which they do on it;
and to use an expression borrowed from the Green Room,
every one is up in his part. I am sorry to say it, they seem
to forget their real characters; more provoking still, the
public seems to forget them too.
1 Nevertheless, it is said that Goldsmith wrote a tragedy when lie TTZS
acting as reader to Richardson's press, about 1756 : see ' Life,' p. 17, and
ante, p. 503 ; also p. 39 of the Percy Memoir. This play, in an un-
finished state, it is intimated, Goldsmith put aside by the advice of
Richardson, and perhaps of Dr. Young, whom our author saw at that
time at Richardson's. But Goldsmith was hardly the man, and espe-
cially at that period of his life, to suppress anything he had written on
mere advice of this kind. He is much more likely to have adventured
further. This play, then, may have been sent to Garrick or some other
manager by the then unknown author, and its rejection, or perhaps the
manner of the rejection, may have pointed some of the asperity of the
present' Enquiry.'—ED.
<pb>
Macrobius has preserved a prologue spoken and written
by the poet Laberius, a Roman knight, whom Caesar forced
upon the stage, written with great elegance and spirit,
which shows what opinions the Romans in general enter-
tained of the profession of an actor.1
Necessitas cujw eursus transversi impetum, etc.
What! no way left to shun th' inglorious stage.
And save from infamy my sinking age!
Scarce half alive, oppress'd with many a year,
What, in the name of dotage, drives me here ?
A time there was, when glory was my guide,
Nor force, nor fraud could turn my steps aside
Unaw'd by pow'r and unappal'd by fear,
With honest thrift I held my honour dear,
But this vile hour disperses all my store,
And all my hoard of honour is no more.
For ah! too partial to my life's decline,
Caesar persuades, submission must be mine,
Him I obey, whom heaven itself obeys,
Hopeless of pleasing, yet inclin'd to please.
Here then at once, I welcome every shame,
And cancel at threescore a life of fame;
No more my titles shall my children tell;
The old buffoon will fit my name as well:
This day beyond its term my fate extends,
For life is ended when our honour ends.2
1 These lines from Macrobius have been included in Goldsmith's
Poems: see our vol. ii., p. 75.—ED.
2 The early unfriendly relations of Goldsmith and Garrick, which
were among the consequences of the first publication of the ' Enquiry,'
are thus stated by Garrick's biographer:—"The first knowledge Mr.
Garrick had of his [Goldsmith's] abilities, was from an attack upon him
by Goldsmith, when he was but a very young author, in a book called
' The Present State of Learning.' Amongst other abuses of the times
(for the Doctor loved to dwell upon grievances) he took notice of the be-
haviour of managers to authors : this must surely have proceeded from
the most generous principles of reforming what was amiss, for the benefit
of others, for the Doctor at that time had not the most distant view of
commencing dramatic author. Little did Goldsmith imagine he should
one day be obliged to ask a favour from the director of a play-house :
however, when the office of secretary to the Society of Arts and Sciences
became vacant, the Doctor was persuaded to offer himself as a candidate.
He was told that Mr. Garrick was a leading member of that learned
body, and his interest and recommendation would be of consequence to
enforce his pretensions. He waited upon the manager, and, in few
words, requested his vote and interest. Mr. Garrick could not avoid
^
<pb>
observing to him, that it was impossible he could lay claim to any
recommendation from him, as he had taken pains to deprive himself of
his assistance, by an unprovoked attack upon his management of the
theatre, in his ' Present State of Learning.' Goldsmith, instead of
making an apology for his conduct, either from misinformation, or mis-
conception, bluntly replied, ' In truth he had spoken his mind, and be-
lieved what he said was very right.' The manager dismissed him with
civility; and Goldsmith lost the office by a very large majority, who
voted in favour of Dr. Templeman.'—Davies' 'Life of Garrick,' fourth
edition, 1784, vol. ii.,pp. 148-9. This was in 1760; and, no doubt, our
author's aim in cutting out much of the matter on " the Stage," when, in
1773, he prepared his second edition, was to remove some of Garrick's
ground of offence, the author and the actor being then fairly friendly
and intimate. The result, however, appears to be a softening rather
than a withdrawal of the original indictment; which, after all, may
really have been directed, as it professed to be, at" the Stage" generally,
rather than at Garrick particularly.—ED.
END or VOL. III.
CHISWICK PRESS :—C. WHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LAME.
<pb>
OF
BOHN'S LIBRARIES.
APRIL, 1893.
<pb>
11 may say in regard to all manner of books, Bonn's Publication Series is the
usefullest thing I know.'—THOMAS CARLYLE.
1 The respectable and sometimes excellent translations of Bonn's Library have
done for literature what railroads have done for internal intercourse.'—EMERSON.
' An important body of cheap literature, for which every living worker in this
country who draws strength from the past has reason to be grateful.'
Professor HENRY MOHLEY.
BOHN'S LIBRARIES.
STANDARD LIBRARY 345 VOLUMES.
HISTORICAL LIBRARY .... 23 VOLUMES.
PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY ... 17 VOLUMES.
ECCLESIASTICAL LIBRARY ... 15 VOLUMES.
ANTIQUARIAN LIBRARY . , . .36 VOLUMES.
ILLUSTRATED LIBRARY .... 75 VOLUMES.
SPORTS AND GAMES 16 VOLUMES.
CLASSICAL LIBRARY 107 VOLUMES.
COLLEGIATE SERIES ..... 10 VOLUMES.
SCIENTIFIC LIBRARY 46 VOLUMES.
ECONOMICS AND FINANCE ... 5 VOLUMES.
REFERENCE LIBRARY . . . . 30 VOLUMES.
NOVELISTS' LIBRARY .... 13 VOLUMES.
ARTISTS' LIBRARY 9 VOLUMES.
CHEAP SERIES 55 VOLUMES.
SELECT LIBRARY OF STANDARD WORKS 31 VOLUMES.
•Messrs. Bell are determined to do more than maintain the reputation of
" Bohn's Libraries."'—Guardian.
' The imprint of Bohn's Standard Library is a guaranty of good editing.'
Critic (N.Y.).
' This new and attractive form in which the volumes of Bohn's Standard
Library are being issued is not meant to hide either indifference in the selection of
books included in this well-known series, or carelessness in the editing.'
St. James's Gazette.
' Messrs. Bell & Sons are making constant additions of an eminently acceptable
character to " Bohn's Libraries." '—Athenaum,
<pb>
CONTAINED IN
BOHN'S LIBRARIES.
747 Vols., Small Post 8vo. cloth.
Complete Detailed Catalogue will be sent on application.
Addison'B Works. 6vols. y. 6d. each.
Aeschylus. Verse Trans, by Anna
Swanwick. y.
— Prose Trans, by T. A. Buckley.
31. 6d.
Agassi! ft Gonld'l Comparative Phy-
siology. y.
Alfleri's Tragedies. Trans, by Bowring.
2 vols. 35. 6d. each.
Alford's Queen's English, is. & it. 6d.
Allen's Battles of the British Navy.
a vols. y. each.
MaTcelUnus.
Trans, by
Trans, by
C. D. Yonge. is. 6d.
Andenen's Danish Tales.
Caroline Peachey. y.
Antoninus (Marcus Aurelius). Trans.
by George Long. y. 6d.
Apollonlus Rhodius. TheArgonautica.
Trans, by E. P. Coleridge, y.
Apulelua, The Works of. y.
Ariosto'u Orlando Furioso. Trans, by
W. S. Rose. 2 vols. y. each.
Aristophanes. Trans, by W. J. Hickie.
2 vols. 5s. each.
Aristotle's Works. 5 vols. 5s- eacl1 ;
2 vols, 31. 6ti. each.
Arrlan. Trans, by E. J. Chinnock. 5*.
Ascuam's Scholernaster. (J. E. B.
Mayor.) is.
Bacon's Essays and Historical Works,
3s. 6d. ; Essays, is. and is. &/.;
Novum Organum, and Advancement
of Learning, 5*.
Ballads and Songs of the Peasantry.
By Robert Bell. y. 6d.
Bass's Lexicon to the Greek Test. as.
Bar's Manual of the History of Philo-
sophy. 51.
Beaumont & Fletcher. Leigh Hunt's
Selections, y. 6d.
Bechuteln's Cage and Chamber Birds.
y-
Beckmann's History of Inventions.
2 vols. y. 6d. each.
Bede'B Ecclesiastical History and the
A. S. Chronicle. 51.
Bell (Sir C.) On the Hand. y.
— Anatomy of Expression. 51.
Bentley's Phalaris. y.
Bjornson's Arne and the Fisher Lassie.
Trans, by W. H. Low. y. 6d.
Blair's Chronological Tables. lor.
Index of Dates. 2 vols. 5;. each.
Bleek's Introduction to the Old Testa-
ment. 2 vols. y. each.
Boethius' Consolation of Philosophy,
&c. y.
Bonn's Dictionary of Poetical Quota-
tions. 6s.
Bond's Handy-book for Verifying
Dates, &c. y.
Bonoml's Nineveh, y.
Boswell's Life of Johnson. (Napier).
6 vols. y. 6d. each.
(Croker.) 5 vols. 201.
Brand's Popular Antiquities. 3 vols.
S.T. each.
Bremer's Works. Trans, by Mary
Howitt. 4 vols. y. 6ii. each.
Bridge water Treatises. 9 vols. Various
prices.
Brink (B. Ten). Early English Litera-
ture, a vols. y. fid. each.
<pb>
Chronicles of the Crusades, y.
Cicero's Works. 7 vols. y. each.
1 vol., 31. dd,
Friendship and Old Age. it. and
is. dd.
Clark's Heraldry. (Planch(S.) y. and
>5t-
Classic Tales, y. 6d.
Coleridge's Prose Works. (Ashe.)
6 vols. y. 6d. each.
Comte's Philosophy of the Sciences.
(G. H. Lewes.) y.
Condo's History of the Arabs in Spain.
3 vols. y. dd. each.
Cooper's Biographical Dictionary.
2 vols. y. each.
Cowper'B Works. (Southey.) 8 vols.
y. 6d. each.
Coze's House of Austria. 4 vols. y.6d.
each. Memoirs of Marlborough.
3 vols. y. dd. each. Atlas to
Marlborough's Campaigns. ior. dd.
Cralk's Pursuit of Knowledge, y.
Craven's Young Sportsman's Manual.
&.
Cruikshank's Punch and Judy. y.
Browne's (Sir Thomas) Works. 3 vols.
y. 6d, each.
Buchanan's Dictionary of Scientific
Terms. 6».
Buckland's Geology and Mineralogy.
2 vols. 15*.
Burke'S Works and Speeches. 8 vols.
y. dd. each. The Sublime and
Beautiful, is. & is. dd. Reflections on
the French Revolution, is.
Life, by Sir James Prior, y. dd.
Burner's Evelina, y. 6d. Cecilia
2 vols. y. fid. each.
Burns' Life by Lockhart. Revised by
W. Scott Douglas, y. dd.
Butler's Analogy of Religion, and
Sermons. 3*. 6d.
Butler's Hiidibras. y.; or 2 vols.,
y. each.
Caesar. Trans, by W.A. M'Devitte. 51.
Camoens' Lusiad. Mickle's Transla-
tion, revised, y. dd.
Carafas (The) of Maddaloni. By
Alfred de Reumont. y. dd.
Carpenter's Mechanical Philosophy 5*.
Vegetable Physiology. 6s. Animal
Physiology. 6s.
Carrel's Counter Revolution under
Charles II. and James II. y. (>d.
Cattermole's Evenings at Haddon
Hall, y.
Catullus and Tibullus. Trans, by
W. K. Kelly, y.
Cellini's Memoirs. (Roscoe.) 31. dd.
Cervantes' Exemplary Novels. Trans.
by W. K. Kelly, y. 6d.
Don Quixote. Motteux's Trans.
revised. 2 vols. y. dd. each.
Galatea. Trans, by G. W. ].
Gyll. y. dd.
Chalmers On Man. y.
ChanrMng'a The Perfect Life. is. and
is. 6d.
Chaucer's Works. Bell's Edition, re-
vised by Skeat. 4 vols. 3*. fid. ea.
Chess Congress of 1862. By J.
Lowenthal. 51.
Chevreul on Colour, y. and js. 6d.
Chllllngworth's The Religion of Pro-
testants, y. (xl.
China: Pictorial, Descriptive, and
Historical, y.
Three Courses and a Dessert. 5*.
Cunningham's Lives of British Painters.
3 vols. y. 6d. each.
Dante. Trans, by Rev. H. F. Gary.
y. dd. Inferno. Separate, is. and
is. 6d. Purgatorio. is. and is. dd.
Paradise, is. and is. dd.
Trans, by I. C. Wright (Flax-
man's Illustrations.) y.
Inferno. Italian Text and Trans.
by Dr. Carlyle. y.
Purgatorio. Italian Text and
Trans, by W. S. Dugdale. y.
De Commlnes' Memoirs. Trans, by
A. R. Scoble. 2 vols. y. dd. each.
Defoe's Novels and Miscel. Works.
6 vols. y. dd. each. Robinson
Crusoe (Vol. VII). 31. dd. or y.
The Plague in London, is. and
is. dd.
Delolme on the Constitution of Eng-
land, y. dd.
Denunlns' Arms and Armour. Trans,
by C. C. Black. 71. dd.
Demosthenes' Orations. Trans, by
C. Rann Kennedy. 4 vols. y., and
I vol. y. dd.
</div>
<pb>
<div id="alphabetical list of" code="5" wordcount="4198">
BOWS LIBRARIES.
Demosthenes' Orations On the Crown.
is. and is. 6d.
De Stael's Corinne. Trans, by Emily
Baldwin and Paulina Driver, y. 6d.
Devey's Logic. $s.
Dictionary of Greek and Latin Quota-
tions, y.
—— of Poetical Quotations (Bohn). 6s.
——of Scientific Terms. (Buchanan.) 6s.
—- of Biography. (Cooper.) avols.
5J. each.
T— of Noted Names of Fiction.
(Wheeler.) y.
of Obsolete and Provincial Eng-
lish. (Wright.) a vols. 51. each.
Didron's Christian Iconography. a vols.
y. each.
Diogenes Laerthu. Trans, by C. D.
Yonge. y.
Dobree'sAdversaria. (Wagner), avols.
51. each.
Dodd's Epigrammatists. 6s.
Donaldson'! Theatre of the Greeks. 51.
Draper's History of the Intellectual
Development of Europe. 3 vols. 51.
each.
Dunlop's History of Fiction. 2 vols.
y. each.
Dyer's History of Pompeii. 71. 6d.
The City of Rome. y.
Dyer's British Popular Customs. 5*.
Early Travels in Palestine. (Wright)
S>-
Eaton's Waterloo Days. is. and is. 6d.
fiber's Egyptian Princess. Trans, b)
E. S. Buchheim. 31. 6rf.
Edge worth's Stories for Children.
y. 6d.
Elite' Specimens of Early English Me-
trical Romances. (Halliwell.) y.
Else's Life of Shakespeare. Trans, by
L. Dora Schmitz. y.
Emenon's Works. 3 vols. y. 6d. each,
or 5 vols. is. each.
Ennemoser's History of Magic, a vols.
. y. each.
Eplctetus. Trans, by George Long. 5*.
Euripides. Trans, by E. P. Coleridge.
a vols. 5*. each.
Eusebius' Eccl. History. Trans, by
C. F. Cruse. 53.
Evelyn's Diary and Correspondence.
(Bray.) 4 vols. y, each.
Fairholt'a Costume in England.
(Dillon.) a vols. y. each.
Fielding's Joseph Andrews, y. 6d,
Tom Jones, a vols. y. 6d. each.
Amelia, y.
Flaxman's Lectures on Sculpture. 6s.
Florence of Worcester's Chronicle.
Trans, by T. Forester. 51.
Foster's Works. 10 vols. y. 6d. each.
Franklin's Autobiography, is.
Gesta Romanorum. Trans, by Swan
& Hooper. y.
Gibbon's Decline and Fall. 7 vols.
3*. 6d. each.
Oilbart's Banking, a vols. y. each.
311 Bias. Trans, by Smollett 6s.
CUraldus Cambrensis. y.
Goethe's Works and Correspondence,
including Autobiography and Annals,
Faust, Elective affinities, Werther,
Wilhelm Meister, Poems and Ballads,
Dramas, Reinecke Fox, Tour in Italy
and Miscellaneous Travels, Early and
Miscellaneous Letters, Correspon-
dence with Eckermann and Soret,
Zelter and Schiller, &c. &c. By
various translators. 16 vols. y. 6d.
each.
Faust. Text with Hayward's
Translation. (Buchheim.) y.
Faust. Part I. Trans, by Anna
Swanwick. is. and is. 6d.
Boyhood. (Part I. of the Auto-
biography.) Trans, by J. Oxenford.
is. and is. 6d.
— Reinecke Fox. Trans, by A.
Rogers, u. and is. 6d.
Goldsmith's Works. (Gibbs.) 5 vols.
3*. 6d. each.
Plays, is. and u. 6d. Vicar of
Wakefield. is. and is. 6d.
Grammont's Memoirs and Boscobel
Tracts. S-f-
Gray's Letters. (D. C. Tovey.)
[/« the press.
Greek Anthology. Trans, by E. Surges.
y.
Greek Romances. (Theagenes and
Chariclea, Daphnis and Chloe, Cli-
tophoandLeucippe.) Trans, by Rev.
R. Smith. 51.
Greek Testament. $f.
<pb>
Herodotus. Trans, by H. F. Gary.
y. 6d. Wheeler's Analysis and Summary
of. y. Turner's Notes on. y.
Heslod, Callimachus and Theognis.
Trans, by Rev. J. Banks, y.
Hoffmann's Tales. The Serapion
Brethren. Trans, by Lieut.-Colonel
Ewing. 2 vols. y. 64.
Hogg's Experimental and Natural
Philosophy. 51.
Holbein's Dance of Death and Bible
Cuts. 51.
Homer. Trans, by T. A. Buckley, a
vols. 51. each.
Pope's Translation. With Flax-
man's Illustrations. 2 vols. 5*. each.
Cowper's Translation, a vols.
y. 6d. each.
Hooper's Waterloo, y. 6d.
Greene, Marlowe, and Ben Jonson'a
Poems. (Robert Bell.) y. 6d.
Gregory's Evidences of the Christian
Religion, y. 64.
GrimJU's Gammer Grethel. Trans, by
E. Taylor. 31. 6rf.
German Tales. Trans, by Mrs.
Hunt. 2 vols. y. 6d. each.
GTOBSl'8 Marco Visconti. y. 6d.
Gulzot'a Origin of Representative
Government in Europe. Trans, by
A. R. Scoble. y. 6d.
The English Revolution of 1640.
Trans, by W. Hazlitt. y. 6d.
, History of Civilisation. Trans, by
W. Hazlitt. 3 vols. y. 6d. each.
Hall (Robert). Miscellaneous Works.
y. 6d.
Handbooks of Athletic Sports. 8 vols.
35. Oil. each.
Handbook of Card and Table Games.
a vols. 31. 6d. each.
of Proverbs. By H. G. Bonn. y.
of Foreign Proverbs. 5s.
Hardwick's History of the Thirty-nine
Articles. 5s.
Harvey's Circulation of the Blood.
(Bowie.) is. and is. 6d.
Hauff'a Tales. Trans, by S. Mendel.
y.6d.
The Caravan and Sheik of Alex-
andria, is. and is. 6d.
Hawthorne's Novels and Tales. 3 vols.
y. 6d. each.
Hazlitt's Lectures and Essays. 7 vols.
y. 6d. each.
Beaton's History of Painting. (Cosmo
Monkhouse.) y.
Hegel's Philosophy of History. Trans.
by J. Sibree. y.
Heine's Poems. Trans, by E. A. Bow-
ring, y. (>d.
Travel Pictures. Trans, by Francis
Storr. 31. 6d.
Help* (Sir Arthur). Life of Thomas
Brassey. is. and is. 6d.
Henderson's Historical Documents of
the Middle Ages. y.
Henfrey's English Corns. (Keary.) 6s.
Henry (Matthew) On the Psalms, y.
Henry of Huntingdon's History. Trans,
by T. Forester, 51.
Horace. Smart's Translation, revised,
by Buckley, y. 6d.
Hugo's Dramatic Works. Trans, by
Mrs. Crosland and F. L. Slous. y. 6d.
Hemani. Trans, by Mrs. Cros-
land. is.
Poems. Trans, by various writers.
Collected by J.H.L. Williams. y.6d.
Humboldt's Cosmos. Trans, by Otte1,
Paul, and Dallas. 4 vols. y. 6d. each,
and i vol. y.
Personal Narrative of his Travels.
Trans, by T. Ross. 3 vols. y. each.
Views of Nature. Trans, by Ott<5
and Bohn. y.
Humphreys' Coin Collector's Mauual.
a vols. y. each.
Hungary, History of. 31. 6d.
Hunt's Poetry of Science, y.
Hutchinson's Memoirs. 3?. 6d.
India before the Sepoy Mutiny. 5*.
Ingulph's Chronicles, y.
James' Life of Richard Cceur de Lion.
2 vols. y. 6d. each. Life and Times of Louis XIV.
2 vols. 35. 6d. each.
Irving (Washington). Complete
Works. 15 vols. 31. 6d. each ; or
in 18 vols. is. each, and 2 vols. is. 6J.
each.
Life and Letters. By Pierre E.
Irving. 2 vols. 31. 6d. each.
<pb>
SOHN'S LIBRARIES.
7
Jameson (Mrs.) Shakespeare's Hero-
ines. 31. 6d.
Jesse (E.) Anecdotes of Dogs. 5*.
Jesse (J. H.) Memoirs of the Court of
England under the Stuarts. 3 vols.
y. each.
Memoirs of the Pretenders. 5*.
Johnson's Lives of the Poets. (Napier).
3 vols. y. dd. each.
Josephus. Whiston's Translation, re-
vised by Rev. A. R. Shilleto. 5 vols.
y. 6d. each.
Joyce's Scientific Dialogues. y.
Jukes-Browne's Handbook of Physical
Geology. 7s. 6d. Handbook of His-
torical Geology. 6s. The Building
of the British Isles. 7*. dd.
Julian the Emperor. Trans, by Rev.
C. W. King. y.
Jnnius's Letters. Woodfall's Edition,
revised. a vols. 31. 6d. each.
Justin, Cornelius Nepos, and Eutropius.
Trans, by Rev. J. a Watson. 5*.
Juvenal, Persius, Sulpicia, and Lu-
cilius. Trans, by L. Evans. y.
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Trans.
byj. M. D. Meiklejohn. y.
Prolegomena, &c. Trans, by E.
Belfort Bax. y.
Kelghtley's Fairy Mythology. y.
Classical Mythology. Revised by Dr.
L. Schmitz. 51.
Eldd On Man. y. 6d.
Klrby On Animals, a vols. 5.!. each.
Knight's Knowledge is Power. 5*.
La Fontaine's Fables. Trans, by E.
Wright, y. dd.
Lamartine's History of the Girondists.
Trans, by H. T. Ryde. 3 vols. y. fid.
each.
Restoration of the Monarchy in
France. Trans, by Capt. Rafter.
4 vols. y. f>d. each.
French Revolution of 1848. y.6d.
Lamb's Essays of Elia and Eliana.
31-. dd., or in 3 vols. is. each. Memorials and Letters. Talfourd's
Edition, revised by W. C. Hazlitt.
a vols. y. dd. each. Specimens of the English Dramatic
Poets of the Time of Elizabeth. y.6d.
Lanzl's History of Painting in Italy,
Trans, by T. Roscoe. 3 vols. 3*. dd.
each.
Lappenberg's England under the
Anglo-Saxon Kings. Trans by B.
Thorpe, a vols. 31. 6d. each.
Lectures on Painting. By Barry, Opie
and Fuseli. y.
Leonardo da Vinci's Treatise on Paint-
ing. Trans, by J. F. Rigaud. 51.
Lepsius'Letters from Egypt, &c. Trans.
by L. and J. B. Homer, y.
Lessing's Dramatic Works. Trans, by
Ernest Bell, a vols. y. dd. each.
Nathan the Wise and Minna von
Barnhelm. is. and u. dd. Laokoon,
Dramatic Notes, &c. Trans, by E. C.
Beasley and Helen Zimmern. y. 6J.
Laokoon separate, is. or is. dd.
Lilly's Introduction to Astrology.
(Zadkiel.) y.
Livy. Trans, by Dr. Spillan and others.
4 vols. y. each.
Locke's Philosophical Works. (J. A.
St. John), a vols. y. 6d. each.
Life. By Lord King. 3*. 6d.
Lodge's Portraits. 8 vols. y. each.
Longfellow's Poetical and Prose Works.
a vols. 5.r. each.
Loudon's Natural History, y.
Lowndes' Bibliographer's Manual. 6
vols. y. each.
Lucan's Pharsalia. Trans, by H. T.
Riley. y.
Lucian's Dialogues. Trans, by H.
Williams, y.
Lucretius. Trans, by Rev. J. S.
Watson, y.
Luther's Table Talk. Trans, by W.
Hazlitt. y. dd.
Autobiography. (Michelet).
Trans, by W. Hazlitt y. 6d.
Machiavelli's History of Florence, &c.
Trans. 31. dd.
Mallet's Northern Antiquities. 51.
M ant ell's Geological Excursions
through the Isle of Wight, &c. 5*.
Petrifactions and their Teachings.
6s. Wonders of Geology, a vols.
•js. dd. each.
Manzonl's The Betrothed, y.
Marco Polo's Travels. Marsden's Edi-
tion, revised by T. Wright, y.
<pb>
Martial's Epigrams. Trans. 7s. 6d.
Martlneau's History of England,
1800-13. 3*. 6d.
History of the Peace, 1816-46.
4 vols. y. 6J. each.
Matthew Paris. Trans, by Dr. Giles.
3 vols. jr. each.
Matthew of Westminster. Trans, by
C. D. Yonge. a vols. 51. each.
Maxwell's Victories of Wellington. 5*.
Menzel's History of Germany. Trans.
by Mrs. Horrocks. 3 vols. 3*. 6d. ea.
Michael Angelo and Raffaelle. By
Duppa and Q. de Quincy. y.
Hichelet's French Revolution. Trans
by C. Cocks, y. 6d.
Mlgnet's French Revolution, y. 6d.
Miller's Philosophy of History. 4 vols.
3*. 6d. each.
MUton'B Poetical Works. (J. Mont-
gomery.) a vols. y. 6d. each.
Prose Works. (J. A. St. John.)
5 vols. y. 6d. each.
Mitford's Our Village. 2 vols. y. 6d.
each.
Moliere's Dramatic Works. Trans, by
C. H. WalL 3 vols. y. 6d. each.
The Miser, Tartuffe, The Shop-
keeper turned Gentleman. I s. & is. 6d.
Montagu's (Lady M. W.) Letters
and Works. (Wharncliffe and Moy
Thomas.) 2 vols. 51. each.
Montaigne's Essays. Cotton's Trans,
revised by W. C. Hazlitt. 3 vols.
y. 6d. each.
Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws. Nu-
gent's Trans, revised by J. V.
Prichard. 2 vols. y. 6d. each.
Morphy'8 Games of Chess. (Lowen-
thal.) y.
Mudie's British Birds. (Martin.) 2 vols.
y. each.
Naval and Military Heroes of Great
Britain, 6s.
Neander'a History of the Christian Re-
ligion and Church. 10 vols. Life of
Christ i vol. Planting and Train-
ing of the Church by the Apostles.
a vols. History of Christian Dogma.
2 vols. Memorials of Christian Life
in the Early and Middle Ages.
16 vols. y. 6d. each.
Kicoliul's History of the Jesuits. 5s,
North's Lives of the Norths. (Jessopp.)
3 vols. y. 6d. each.
Nugent's Memorials of Hampden. y.
Ockley's History of the Saracens, y. 6d.
Ordericus Vltalia. Trans, by T.
Forester. 4 vols. y. each.
Ovid. Trans, by H. T. Riley. 3 vols.
y. each.
Pascal's Thoughts. Trans, by C.
Kegan Paul. 3.1. 6d.
Pauli'B Life of Alfred the Great, &c. y.
Life of Cromwell, is. and is. 6J.
Pausanlas' Description of Greece.
Trans, by Rev. A. R. Shilleto. 2 vols.
y. each.
Pearson on the Creed. (Walford.) y.
PepyB' Diary. (Braybrooke.) 4 vols.
y. each.
Percy's Reliques of Ancient English
Poetry. (Prichard.) 2 vols. 3J.6rf.ea.
Petrarch's Sonnets, y.
Pettlgrew'a Chronicles of the Tombs.
5»-
Pbilo-Judseus. Trans, by C. D. Yonge.
4 vols. y. each.
Pickering's Races of Man. 51.
Pindar. Trans, by D. W. Turner. 5*.
Planche's History of British Costume.
y-
Plato. Trans, by H. Cary, G. Surges,
and H. Davis. 6 vols. y. each.
Apology, Crito, Phaedo, Prota-
goras, is. and is. 6d.
Day's Analysis and Index to the
Dialogues, y.
Plautus. Trans, by H. T. Riley.
a vols. y. each. Trinummus, Menaechmi, Aulu-
laria, Captivi. is. and is. 6d.
Pliny's Natural History, Trans, by
Dr. Bostock and H. T. Riley. 6 vols.
jr. each.
Pliny the Younger, Letters of. Mel-
moth's trans, revised by Rev. F. C. T.
Bosanquet. SJ-
Plutarch's Lives. Trans, by Stewart
and Long. 4 vols. y. 6d. each.
Moralia. Trans, by Rev. C. W
King and Rev. A. R. Shilleto. a vols.
y. each.
Poetry of America. (W. J. Linton.1
y. 6d.
<pb>
BOHN'S LIBRARIES.
Political Cyclopaedia. 4 vols. 3J.6V7.ea.
Polyglot of Foreign Proverbs, y.
Pope's Poetical Works. (Carruthers.)
2 vols. y. each.
Homer. (J. S. Watson.) a vols.
y. each.
Life and Letters. (Carruthers.) y.
Pottery and Porcelain. (H. G. Bohn.)
55. and lor. 6d.
Propertius. Trans; by Rev. P. J. F.
Gantillon. y. dd.
Prout (Father.) Rcliques, y. .'.,
Qulntlllan's Institutes of Oratory.
Trans, by Rev. J. S. Watson, a vols.
Jt. each.
Racine's Tragedies. Trans, by R. R
Boswell. 3 vols. y. dd. each.
Ranke's History of the Popes. Trans.
by E. Foster. 3 vols. y. 6d. each.
— Latin and Teutonic Nations.
" Trans, by P. A. Ashworth. jr. 6d.
— History of Servia, Trans, by
Mrs. Kerr. y. 6ii.
Bennie's Insect Architecture. (J. G.
' Wood.) y.
Reynold's Discourses and Essays.
(Beechy.) a vols. y. dd. each.
RlcardO's Political Economy. (Con-
ner.) y.
Rlchter's Levana, y. 6d.
— Flower Fruit and Thorn Pieces.
Trans, by Lieut.-CoL Ewing. y. dd.
Roger de Hovenden'a Annals. Trans.
by Dr. Giles. a vols. y. each.
Roger of Wendorer. Trans, by Dr.
Giles. 3 vols. y. each.
ROffet's Animal and Vegetable Phy-
siology, a vols. 6s. each.
Rome in the Nineteenth Century. (C.A.
Eaton.) 2 vols. y, each.
Roscoe's Leo X. a vols. y. dd. each.
Lorenzo de Medici, y. dd.
Russia, History of. By W. K. Kelly.
3 vols. y. dd. each.
Sallust, Floras, and Velleius Pater-
culus. Trans, by Rev. J. S. Watson.
y-
Schiller's Works. Including H istory of
the Thirty Years' War, Revolt of the
Netherlands, Wallenstein, William
Tell, Don Carlos, Mary Stuart, Maid
-of Orleans, Bride of Messina, Robbers,
Fiesco, Love and Intrigue, Demetrius,
Ghost-Seer, Sport of Divinity, Poems,
Aesthetical and Philosophical Essays,
&c. By various translators. 7 vols.
y. 6d. each.
Mary Stuart and The Maid of
Orleans. Trans, by J. Hellish and
Anna Swanwick. is. and is. dd.
Schlegel (F.). Lectures and Miscel-
laneous Works. $ vols. y. 6d. each.
.^—- (A. Wl). Lectures on Dramatic
Art and Literature, y. dd.
Schopenhauer's Essays. Selected and
Trans, by E. Belfort Ba*.' 5».
On. the Fourfold Root of the
Principle of Sufficient Reason and
on tha Will in Nature. Trans, by
Mdme. HillebnCnd. y.
Schouw'a Earth, Plants, and Man.
Trans, by A. Henfrey. y.
Schumann's Early Letters. Trans, by
May Herbert, y. 6d.
Reissmann's Life of. Trans, by
A. L. Alger. y. dd.
Seneca on Benefits. Trans, by Aubrey
Stewart, y. dd.
Minor EssSiys and On Clemency.
Trans, by Aubrey Stewart, y.
Sharpe's History of Egypt a vols.
y. each.
Sheridan's Dramatic Works, y. 6d.
—— Plays, is. and is. dd.
Slsmondi's Literature of the South of
Europe. Trans, by T. Roscoe. a
vols. y. dd. each.
Six Old English Chronicles, y.
Smith (Archdeacon). Synonyms and
Antonyms. 5*.
Smith (Adam). Wealth of Nations.
(Belfort Bax.) a vols. y. 64. each. Theory of Moral Sentiments.
y. 6d.
Smith (Pye). Geology and Scripture.
y-
Smyth's Lectures on Modern History.
a vols. Jt. 6d. each.
Sc crates' Ecclesiastical History. 51.
Sophocles. Trans, by E. P. Coleridge,
B.A. y.
Southey's Life of Nelson, y.
Life of Wesley, y.
<pb>
IO
ALPHABETICAL LIST OF BOfffTS LIBRARIES.
Bozomen's Ecclesiastical History. y.
Spinoza's Chief Works. Trans, by
R. H. M. Elwes. a vols. y. each.
Stanley's Dutch and Flemish Painters,
5*-
Starling's Noble Deeds of Women. 5.1.
Staunton's Chess Players' Handbook.
51. Chess Praxis, w. Chess Players'
Companion, y. Chess Tournament
of 1851. y.
Btockhardt's Experimental Chemistry.
(Heaton.) 51.
Btrabo'l Geography. Trans, by
Falconer and Hamilton. 3 vols.
5*. each.
Strickland's Queens of England. 6
vols. y. each. Mary Queen of
Scots, a vols. y. each. Tudor
and Stuart Princesses. 5s.
Stuart ft Revett'a Antiquities of
Athens, y.
luetonius' Lives of the Caesars and of
the Grammarians. Thomson's trans.
revised by T. Forester. 51.
• ully'B Memoirs. Mrs. Lennox's
trans, revised. 4 vols. y. 6d. each.
Tacitus. The Oxford trans, revised.
a vols. y. each.
Tales of the Genii. Trans, by Sir.
Charles Morell. y.
Taseo's Jerusalem Delivered. Trans.
by J. H. Wiffen. y.
Taylor's Holy Living and Holy Dying.
y. 6d.
Terence and Phsedrus. Trans, by H. T.
Riley. 5*
Theocritus, Bion, Moschus, and
Tyrtseus. Trans, by Rev. J. Banks.
y-
Theodoret and Evagrius. y.
Thierry's Norman Conquest. Trans.
by W. Hazlitt. a vols. y. 6rf. each.
Thucydides. Trans by Rev. H. Dale.
a vols. y. 6d. each. Wheeler's Analysis and Summary
of. y.
Trevelyan's Ladies In Parliament is.
and is. fid.
Ulrlcl's Shakespeare's Dramatic Art.
Trans, by L. Dora Schmitz. a vols.
y. 6d. each.
Uncle Tom's Cabin, y. 6d.
Ore's Cotton Manufacture of Great
Britain. 3 vols. y. each. Philosophy of Manufacture, js. 6d.
Vasari's Lives of the Painters. Trans,
by Mrs. Foster. 6 vols. y. 6d. each.
Virgil. Davidson's Trans, revised by
T. A. Buckley, y. 6d.
Voltaire's Tales. Trans, by R. B.
Boswell. y. 6d.
Walton's Angler. 5;.
Lives. (A. H. Bullen.) 51.
Waterloo Days By C. A, Eaton.
is. and is. 6ti.
Wellington, Life of. By 'An Old
Soldier.' 51.
Werner's Templars in Cyprus. Trans.
by E. A. M. Lewis, y. 6d.
Westropp's Handbook of Archaeology.
5*-
Wheatley. On the Book of Common
Prayer, y. 6d.
Wheeler's Dictionary of Noted Names
of Fiction, y.
White's Natural History of Selborne.
y-
Wleseler*s Synopsis of the Gospels.
S»-
William of Malmesbury's Chronicle.
5*-
Wright's Dictionary of Obsolete and
Provincial English, a vols. y. each.
Xenophon. Trans, by Rev. J. S. Wat-
son and Rev. H. Dale. 3 vols. y. ea.
Young's Travels in France, 1787-89.
(M. Betham-Edwards.) 31. 6d.
Tour in Ireland, 1776-0, (A. W.
Hutton.) a vols. 3*. 6d. each.
Yule-Tide Stories. (B. Thorpe.) 51.
<pb>
New Editions, fraip. 870. 2». M. each, net.
THE ALDINE EDITION
or THB
BRITISH POETS.
• This excellent edition of the English classics, with their complete texts and
scholarly introductions, are something very different from the cheap yolnraes of
extracts which are jnst now so much too common.'—St. Jamet't Gazetti.
' An excellent series. Small, hand;, and complete.'—Saturday Review.
Blake. Edited by W. M. Eossetti.
Keats. Edited by the late Lord
Honghton.
Campbell. Edited by his son-in-
law, the Rev. A. W.Hffl. With Memoir
by W. Allingham.
Coleridge. Edited by T. Ashe,
B.A. 2vols.
Vaughan. Sacred Poems and Pious
Ejaculations. Edited by the HeT. H.
Lyte.
Raleigh, and Wotton. With Se-
lections from the Writiups of other
COURTLY POETS from 1540 to 1650.
Edited by Yen. Archdeacon Hannah,
D.O.L.
Chatterton. Edited by the Eev.
W. W. Skeat, M.A. 2 vols.
Eogera. Edited by Edward Bell,
M.A.
Herbert. Edited by the Eev. A. B.
Grosart.
Chaucer. Edited by Dr. B. Morris,
with Memoir by Sir H. Nicolas. 6 vols.
Spenser. Edited by J. Payne Col-
lier, 5 Tols.
Dryden. Edited by the Rev. B.
Hooper, M.A. 5 vols.
Gray. Edited by J. Bradshaw,
LL.D.
Pope. Edited by G-. E. Dennis.
With Memoir by John Dennis. 3 vols.
Milton. Edited by Dr. Bradshaw.
3 vols.
Churchill. Edited by Jas. Hannay.
2 Tols.
Scott. Edited by John Dennis.
Svolfl.
Shelley.
Forman.
Edited by H. Bnxton
5 vols.
Prior. Edited by E. B. Johnson.
2 vols.
Wordsworth. Edited by Prof.
Dowden. 7 vola.
Burns. Edited by G. A. Aitken.
3 Tola.
To be followed by
Herrlok. Edited by George Saints-
bury. 2 vOlS.
Goldsmith. Edited by Austin
Dobson.
Butler. Edited by B. B. Johnson.
2 vols.
Thomson. Edited by the Eev. D.
0. Tovey. 2 vols.
Collins. Edited by W. Moy
Thomas.
Surrey. Edited by J. Gregory
Foster.
Wyatt. Edited by J. Gregory
Foster.
Swift. Edited by the Eev. E.
Hooper, M.A. 3 vols.
Parnell. By G. A. Aitken.
Cowper. Edited by John Bruce,
F.S.A. s vols.
Young. 2 vols.
Shakespeare's Poems.
<pb>
THE ONLY AUTHORIZED AND COMPLETE ' WEBSTEE.'
WEBSTER'S INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY.
An entirely New Edition, thoroughly Revised, considerably Enlarged,
and reset in New Type.
Medium 4(0. 2118 pages, 3500 illustrations.
Prices: Cloth, £i us. 6d.; half-calf, £2 2s.; half-russia, £2 53.;
calf, £2 8s. Also in 2 vols. cloth, £i 143.
In addition to the Dictionary of Words, with their pronunciation, ety-
mology, alternative spellings, and various meanings, illustrated by quotations
and numerous woodcuts, there are several valuable appendices, comprising a
Pronouncing Gazetteer of the World; Vocabularies of Scripture, Greek, Latin,
and English Proper Names; a Dictionary of the noted Names of Fiction; a
Brief History of the English Language; a Dictionary of Foreign Quotations,
Words, Phrases, Proverbs, &c. ; a Biographical Dictionary with 10,000
Names, &c.
This last revision, comprising and superseding the issues of 1847, 1864,
and 1880, is by far the most complete that the Work has undergone during
the sixty-two years that it has been before the public. Every page has been
treated as if the book were now published for the first time.
SOME PRESS OPINIONS ON THE NEW EDITION.
'We believe that, all things considered, this will be found to be the best
existing English dictionary in one volume. We do not know of any work
similar in size and price which can approach it in completeness of vocabulary,
variety of information, and general usefulness.'—Guardian.
'The most comprehensive and the most useful of its kind."—National
Observer.
'A magnificent edition of Webster's immortal Dictionary." — Daily
Telegraph.
' A thoroughly practical and useful dictionary."'—Standard.
' A special feature of the present book is the lavish use of engravings,
which at once illustrate the verbal explanations of technical and scientific
terms, and permit them to remain readably brief. It may be enough to refer
to the article on " Cross." By the use of the little numbered diagrams we are
spared what would have become a treatise, and not a very clear one. . . .
We recommend the new Webster to every man of business, every father of a
family, every teacher, and almost every student—to everybody, in fact, who is
likely to be posed at an unfamiliar or half-understood word or phrase.'—
St. James's Gazette.
Prospectuses, with Specimen Pages, on application.
London: GEORGE BELL & SONS, York Street, Covent Garden.
<pb>
<pb>
/eiRCUCA
828
G57x
1884
v.3
ADDDDDm?flbSl
Goldsmith
Works
 G45442
<pb>
 ADDDQQm7flbSl
</div>
<pb>
